
                               1 of 27 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright (c) 2017 The George Washington Law Review
                        The George Washington Law Review

                                   May, 2017

                        The George Washington Law Review

                           85 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 712

LENGTH: 42701 words

Article: Police Unions

NAME: Catherine L. Fisk and L. Song Richardson*

BIO: * The authors are Chancellor's Professor of Law and Professor of Law at the
University of California, Irvine School of Law. The authors wish to thank Erwin
Chemerinsky, Michael Oswalt, Martin Malin, Joe Slater, Ann Hodges, David
Sklansky, and Jeff Hirsch for valuable feedback, and Ivette Aragon, Zackory
Burns, and John Sirjord for their helpful research assistance. Finally, they
wish to thank the staff at The George Washington Law Review for their work
editing this Article: , including Melika Hadziomerovic, Julia Duke, and Richard
Rothman.

HIGHLIGHT:

   Abstract


   No issue has been more controversial in the discussion of police union
responses to allegations of excessive force than statutory and contractual
protections for officers accused of misconduct, as critics assail such
protections and police unions defend them. For all the public controversy over
police unions, there is relatively little legal scholarship on them. Neither the
legal nor the social science literature on policing and police reform has
explored the opportunities and constraints that labor law offers in thinking
about organizational change. The scholarly deficit has substantial public policy
consequences, as groups ranging from Black Lives Matter to the U.S. Department
of Justice are proposing legal changes that will require the cooperation of
police labor organizations to implement. This Article: fills that gap.

   Part I explores the structure and functioning of police departments and the
evolution of police unions as a response to a hierarchical and autocratic
command structure. Part II examines how and why police unions have been
obstacles to reform, focusing particularly on union defense of protections for
officers accused of misconduct. Part III describes and analyzes instances in
which cities have implemented reforms to reduce police violence and improve
police-community relations over fifty years. All of them involved the
cooperation of the rank-and-file, and many involved active cooperation with the
union. Part IV proposes mild changes in the law governing police labor relations
to facilitate rank-and-file support of the kinds of transparency,
accountability, and constitutional policing practices that police reformers have
been advocating for at least a generation. We propose a limited form of minority
union bargaining - a reform that has been advocated in other contexts by both
the political left and the political right at various points in recent history -
to create an institutional structure enabling diverse representatives of police
rank-and-file to meet and confer with police management over policing practices.




 TEXT:
 [*713]

   Introduction

 A major law and policy debate shaping the contemporary landscape of racial
inequality today concerns police, whom critics assail as a major source of
racial inequity and whose unions are said to be the major obstacle to reform.
Critics often cite a recent instance in which a police officer who engaged in
appalling misconduct escapes firing or discipline through the intervention of a
union or by invoking a statutory or contractual job protection. The many recent
instances of police killing civilians - when Darren Wilson shot Michael Brown in
Ferguson,  [*714]  Missouri, n1 or when Daniel Pantaleo choked Eric Garner to
death on a Staten Island street, n2 or when Baltimore police officers killed
Freddie Gray while driving him to jail, n3 or when Peter Liang shot Akai Gurley
in the stairwell of a New York apartment building, n4 or when Jeronimo Yanez
shot Philando Castile during a traffic stop in suburban St. Paul, n5 or when
Jeffrey Cook and Omar Thyme shot Alexia Christian in the back of an Atlanta
police car, n6 or when five police officers shot and killed Kisha Michael in her
car while she was unconscious n7 - have sparked calls to fire and prosecute the
officers involved, and outrage at the difficulty and delays in doing so and at
the union's resistance to summary discipline. People rightly wonder why the
union conceives of its obligation as protecting cops who appear to have engaged
in clear misconduct rather than protecting the interests of "good" ones by
allowing "bad" ones to be disciplined, fired, or prosecuted. Under this
analysis, public employee unions are a major impediment to the kinds of reforms
that would eliminate pervasive racism toward people of color and the urban poor.
n8

   For their part, many rank-and-file police officers see the union as an
important protection against endemic arbitrariness in discipline. As  [*715]  we
discuss in Part II, police union leaders believe they are legally and morally
obliged to advocate for their members, including those accused of misconduct,
and to resist efforts to strengthen the power of management to discipline
officers. In part because union leaders are elected by the membership, many are
reluctant to publicly question the legality of their members' behavior, and some
dismiss criticisms as reflecting anti-police attitudes. If police union
officials have any private reservations, they feel constrained by their role to
remain publicly silent, at the very least, and often describe criminal
punishment of officers who kill as being politically motivated efforts to
scapegoat individual officers for systemic problems. n9 In their view, what
appears to outsiders to be egregious police violence is in fact a justifiable
reaction to dangerous suspects, bad management, and difficult working
conditions, and the union's role is to protect hard-working officers from a
witch hunt so that officers can protect the public.

   In-depth investigations of police departments in the wake of highly
publicized incidents of police violence since 2012 provide support for the views
of both police union critics and police union leaders. For instance, in January
2017, the Department of Justice ("DOJ") issued a scathing report ("DOJ Chicago
Report") finding, among other things, that the Chicago Police Department ("CPD")
engaged in a pattern and practice of unreasonable uses of force, and that "there
is no meaningful, systemic accountability for officers who use force in
violation of the law or CPD policy." n10 In part, these accountability failures
are due to collective bargaining agreements between the city and the unions that
contain provisions impeding the investigation of alleged police misconduct. n11
However, the DOJ concluded that the CPD bears some responsibility for these
accountability failures. Among other things, the DOJ Chicago Report states that
the contracts allow CPD to override some of the problematic contract provisions,
but management rarely does so. n12

    [*716]  The August 2016 report of the DOJ, Investigation of the Baltimore
City Police Department ("DOJ Baltimore Report"), faults both the rank-and-file
and supervisors for the pattern of unconstitutional stops, searches, arrests,
and excessive force, the "severe and unjustified" racial disparities harming
African Americans, and retaliation against civilians and police officers who
speak out about abuses. n13 The DOJ Baltimore Report criticizes certain
statutory and contractual job protections, which police unions fought hard to
attain and vigorously defend, but it also describes shocking incidents of
managerial neglect and retaliation of the sort that prompt employees to join and
defend unions in the first place. n14 Although the DOJ Baltimore Report takes no
position on that city's police union, as we explain below in Section II.B.1,
past DOJ civil rights interventions and consent decrees have encountered unions
as obstacles to implementation of reform. Many proposed reforms entail creating
mechanisms of institutionalized cooperation between rank-and-file and management
that unions may be uniquely capable of delivering. As we argue below in Section
III.B, such reforms will not succeed if they fail to consider why unions have
not previously advocated such mechanisms or why they might resist them.

   The debates over police unions are part of a larger legal and policy debate
over whether public employee unions are agents of or obstacles to government
reform, particularly because local government employees (including police) are
among the most densely unionized in the country. n15 A standard criticism of
government employee unions is that they exercise disproportionate influence in
setting government policy. n16 Until the passing of Justice Scalia, the Supreme
Court appeared to be on the path to reduce union power, n17 and the Court with
[*717]  Justice Gorsuch is expected to continue down that path. n18 Moreover,
legislatures in many states have eliminated the ability of some government
employees to bargain collectively and narrowed the permissible subjects of
bargaining for those employees who retain union rights at all, and these
reductions in the power of public employee unions are often described as being
necessary to reduce the cost and improve the quality of government service. n19
Concern about the influence of public employee unions is not confined to the
political right, as activists and scholars have focused criticism on union
contractual provisions protecting officers investigated for excessive use of
force. n20

   Perhaps no issue has been more controversial in the discussion of police
union responses to allegations of excessive force than statutory and contractual
protections for officers accused of misconduct, as critics  [*718]  have
assailed such protections and police unions defend them. n21 Police in most
states enjoy significantly more procedural and substantive protections against
discipline for on-the-job and off-the-job misconduct than do private sector
employees. As government employees, police have constitutional due process
rights if, as a matter of state or local law or practice, they have an
expectation of continued employment sufficient to create a property interest in
the job. n22 They have constitutional immunity from use, in a criminal
prosecution, of a statement made during an internal administrative investigation
when the officer was compelled to speak, under penalty of job discipline. n23
They also have a limited First Amendment right to be free from retaliation for
political activity off the job, unless the municipality has adopted a valid,
nondiscriminatory law prohibiting partisan political activity. n24 In at least
sixteen states, police additionally have statutory rights to certain procedures
in the investigation of misconduct under Law Enforcement Officers Bills of
Rights ("LEOBORs") as well as civil service protections in many other states.
n25 Supplementing these constitutional and statutory protections are police
union contracts, which  [*719]  contain additional procedural and substantive
protections against discipline. n26

   The public controversy gives new urgency to consideration of the role of
police unions in promoting or thwarting police reform. n27 Scholars of policing
have debated police professionalization and community policing, and have
discussed the relationship between policing and democracy, but have, as police
scholar Samuel Walker put it, "seriously neglected" police unions. n28 The
substantial social science literature on policing and police unions has rarely
engaged with public sector labor law, other than to note that collective
bargaining rights are positively correlated with increased compensation and job
protections. n29 Although labor law provides important opportunities for and
constraints on organizational change in police departments, n30 police unions
and police union contractual protections have been neglected in labor law
scholarship. n31 A particular concern of labor law has been whether and how
unionization can improve the quality of work for the benefit of  [*720]
consumers of goods and services while simultaneously protecting the dignity and
standard of living of workers. n32 But more work remains to be done in thinking
about police unions and public sector labor law as offering leverage or
resistance to change. In short, although there is a general scholarly consensus
that police unions play an important role in policing and politics, there is no
agreement concerning their proper role, and there has been almost no sustained
analysis of the role they might play in police reform. n33 The scholarly deficit
has substantial public policy consequences, as groups ranging from Black Lives
Matter to the U.S. DOJ are proposing legal changes that will require the
cooperation of police labor organizations to implement notwithstanding a long
history of police rank-and-file resistance to imposition of reforms without
their input. n34

   In public policy debates and in the nascent legal scholarship on policing in
the wake of the recent spate of police violence that spawned the Black Lives
Matter movement, many have advocated restricting the job protections for police
officers in order to facilitate the detection and punishment of criminal police
violence. Reform is essential. But reform will not be accomplished simply by
eliminating job protections, even if that were politically feasible. Without
support from unions and some police rank-and-file, the kinds of reforms that are
now being proposed - e.g., public involvement in union-management negotiation of
disciplinary procedures n35 - are unlikely to be enacted or implemented. Rather,
police need to be involved in improving police practices, and that involvement
requires the cooperation of some kind of police labor representative.

   This Article: explains how public sector labor law might be changed to enable
activists outside of police departments to find allies within police departments
to support reforms. It does not propose specific policy reforms about policing.
Rather, it proposes structural reform to police union representation and the
duty to meet and confer in order to enable policy reforms to be adopted and,
importantly, implemented. In particular, this Article: proposes that state
public sector  [*721]  labor law be amended to require police departments to
meet and confer with labor representatives other than the certified police
union. This modified form of minority union bargaining would, ideally, enable
the minority of officers in a department who favor reform to discuss police
practices even if the majority union prefers not to, or is legally prohibited
from, negotiating over those practices. The minority union could be any
organization the officers choose to represent them. It might be an existing
police officers' affinity group (e.g., the local or national Black, Latino,
women's or other officers' association), or a Black Lives Matter chapter, or any
other group whom a significant number of officers in a department select. The
scope of the duty to confer would encompass topics that are not mandatory
subjects of bargaining under most state's labor law, including use of force,
policing techniques, and community relations. The minority union would have no
authority to modify the terms of the collective bargaining agreement negotiated
by the majority union. The point of minority union bargaining would be to give
the rank-and-file a voice in policing policy without undermining the economic
and other terms that management negotiated with the majority union. n36 A
limited form of minority union bargaining - a reform that has been advocated in
other contexts by both the political left and the political right at various
points in recent history - would create an institutional structure enabling
diverse representatives of police rank-and-file to meet and confer with police
management over policing practices. Although it might weaken the power of the
majority union, as any form of minority-or dual-unionism necessarily does, it
would facilitate rank-and-file support of the kinds of transparency,
accountability, and constitutional policing practices that police reformers have
been advocating for at least a generation.

   Part I explores the structure and functioning of police departments and the
evolution of police unions as a response to a hierarchical and autocratic
command structure. Part II examines how and why police unions have been
obstacles to reform, focusing on union defense of protections for officers
accused of misconduct. Part III describes and analyzes fifty years' worth of
instances in which cities have implemented reforms to reduce police violence and
improve police-community relations. All of the proposed reforms involved the
cooperation of the rank-and-file, and many involved active cooperation with the
union. Part IV proposes relatively straightforward changes in  [*722]  the law
governing police labor relations to implement the proposed form of
minority-unionism.

   I. Police Departments and Police Unions

   A. The Structure of Police Departments and Police Labor Relations

 Across the nation, there are approximately 18,000 police agencies which
together employ more than 1.1 million people, 750,000 of whom are sworn
officers. n37 Although many small or rural departments do not have unions, most
large urban police departments are unionized. n38 The total number of unionized
officers is unknown and unions differ in their structure, priorities, and degree
of activity. n39

   Police departments are hierarchical, with a chain of command as in the
military n40 and a sharp division between the leadership and the rank-and-file.
n41 The top command, consisting of the police commissioner and the various
chiefs, n42 is responsible for official policymaking within the organization.
n43 Typically, they have very little personal contact with the rank-and-file,
n44 perhaps in part due to the long-dominant belief among police management
scholars that police departments are  [*723]  best organized with "strong,
top-down management." n45 Middle management consists of captains, lieutenants,
sergeants, and other equivalent positions. n46 Sergeants make up the lowest
level of management and serve as the direct supervisors of the rank-and-file.
n47 Given their placement in the management structure, sergeants often are
aligned more closely with the rank-and-file than with top command. n48 The bulk
of the department consists of the rank-and-file, who sit at the bottom of the
organizational pyramid. n49 At any given time, over sixty percent of officers
within a department are in the patrol division. n50 Most will remain at this
rank for their entire careers. n51 This hierarchy has important implications for
unions, we argue, because officers turn to unions to protect their interests
since they otherwise have little voice in the operation of the department.

   Under the prevailing quasi-military style of police department organization,
management seeks to maintain a high level of internal discipline and strict
rank-and-file obedience to rules and policies. n52 The prevailing belief is that
the rank-and-file must be strictly controlled and monitored in order to ensure
compliance. n53 Police managers "worry about laziness, corruption, racial
profiling, and excessive force, and they do not trust rank-and-file officers on
any of those dimensions." n54 "In the face of continued scandals and charges of
inequity,  [*724]  police administrators tend to maintain an almost phobic
preoccupation with accountability and conformity." n55

   Although management focuses intensely on control and conformity with policy,
police work inevitably requires the exercise of discretion. n56 The judgment and
discretion that most police officers and management would agree is essential to
good policing means that precise rules cannot always be followed, general rules
do not provide meaningful guidance, n57 and policies are therefore not
consistently enforced. Flexibility opens the door to arbitrariness and
discrimination. This is one reason why the relationship between line officers
and management has been described as one "dominated by a feeling of
uncertainty." n58 Rank-and-file officers fear punitive enforcement of policy and
often perceive management as being "not on the level," n59 using rules primarily
to blame them when things go wrong. n60

   Rank-and-file officers in many departments do not trust management to mete
out discipline fairly. In Los Angeles, for example, in 2001, the Police
Protective League, the Los Angeles Police Department ("LAPD") officers' union,
requested that law professor Erwin Chemerinsky and a group of civil rights
lawyers investigate a major scandal in the Rampart Division. n61 The League did
not trust the LAPD to conduct a fair and thorough investigation and feared the
union and some officers might be scapegoated for a corruption scandal that they
thought was a symptom of a larger problem. Professor  [*725]  Chemerinsky's
analysis of the LAPD's report on the Rampart Division found that "virtually
everyone, except the Chief of Police and the Board of Inquiry, is dissatisfied
with the current disciplinary system." n62 Concerns included perceptions that
the chief controlled the system and used it to protect command staff and
persecute whistleblowers and minority officers. n63 Nearly fifteen years later,
similar perceptions persist. In 2014, an overwhelming number of LAPD
rank-and-file officers still believed that management's disciplinary decisions
"revolved around an officer's rank and whether he or she was well liked by their
superiors in the department. [Officers believed that c]ommand-level officers
routinely received slaps on the wrist or no punishment, while lower-ranking
officers were suspended for similar misconduct ... ." n64 Similarly, in 2016,
the DOJ found that the Baltimore Police Department failed to apply discipline
consistently: "Throughout our interviews and ride-alongs with officers, we heard
officers express that discipline is only imposed if an incident makes it into
the press or if you were on the wrong side of a supervisor, not because of the
magnitude of the misconduct." n65

   Empirical studies of police stress find that the indignities of poor
employment practices - "arbitrary decision making, poor working conditions,"
feeling lack of support from supervisors - cause more stress to officers than
"witnessing injuries, deaths or other potentially traumatic events" involving
police work. n66 Recent commentary on police legitimacy noted this and, giving
the example of New York police officers who were disciplined and publicly
reprimanded for playing football with youngsters at a Fourth of July celebration
at a low-income housing project, observed that police officers "react to
arbitrary power in the same way that citizens do when they are policed: with
[*726]  ambivalence about the institution, and resistance or hostility toward
the rules of that institution." n67 As one policing scholar observed,



    Officers come to find out that when they are recognized it is usually for
something that they have done wrong (procedurally), rather than for something
they have done well (substantively)... Officers are constrained, working within
an organization that demands that all problems be handled on the street with
efficiency and certainty, yet held to excessive scrutiny by "watchful
administrators" at a later date. n68



    In sum, police scholars note that rank-and-file officers often perceive
their departments "as a mock bureaucracy, capricious, unpredictable and
punitive, rather than democratic and fair." n69 Although the reality is that
both management and the rank-and-file understand that rules cannot guide their
behavior in all instances, any violation, no matter how small, can still result
in punishment. n70 Thus, the rank-and-file views management's fixation on
rule-following in the face of these contradictions as illegitimate. n71 The
result is that management officers "are perceived as mere disciplinarians" and
"are often viewed by the line personnel with distrust and even contempt." n72 In
light of this focus on control and discipline of rank-and-file officers for
conduct like playing football with kids that seems desirable or at least benign,
police unions often focus their bargaining and contract enforcement efforts
toward protecting officers from discipline and arbitrary  [*727]  work
assignments, fighting for compensation, and ensuring compliance with seniority
rules, among other labor interests. n73

   Although these negative perceptions of management's motives could be tempered
by contact, rank-and-file officers have few opportunities to interact with top
command outside of the context of punishment. n74 They have little direct
communication with top-level management because the information flow is "almost
exclusively downwards through the chain of command," and not the opposite. n75
This isolation from top command increases the risk of miscommunication,
misunderstandings, and resentment, and it also leads police unions to adopt a
highly defensive approach to union-management relations. n76

   The rank-and-file's shared perception that management's exercises of power
are illegitimate, coupled with their isolation from top command, facilitates the
creation of a subculture amongst the rank-and-file with its own political life
that remains largely hidden from management. n77 Amongst the rank-and-file,
there is a "rare degree of camaraderie and group loyalty" n78 that is partly the
result of having to confront "unpredictable and punitive supervisory oversight."
n79 In short, scholars agree that management and the rank-and-file have  [*728]
their own distinct cultures n80 and that the relationship between them is often
characterized by "mutual suspicion and mistrust." n81

   As will be explored below in Section I.C, police officers responded to this
kind of hierarchical and punitive supervisory structure by forming unions. And
many police officers are quite dedicated unionists precisely because they see
the union as necessary to protect their interests in fair process and in having
a voice in the workplace.

   B. From Professionalism to Community Policing

 The contemporary emphasis on hierarchy and adherence to rules was the product
of mid-twentieth-century reforms that attempted to combat police corruption by
professionalizing police work. In the late nineteenth century, police were
closely tied to their communities, were under the control of local political
machines, engaged in foot patrols, and often lived in the communities they
policed. n82 The close connection to the community and its political machinery
was believed to lead to police corruption. n83 To sever police hiring,
promotion, and control from the local political machine, early twentieth-century
local government reformers sought to "professionalize" the police. n84
Professionalism did not refer to giving individual rank-and-file officers more
autonomy and discretion. n85 Rather, it referred to reducing political influence
over police and improving police efficiency. n86

   A crucial aspect of the professionalism project was to define the core
mission of the police as crime control, thereby insulating officers from
political influence and corruption by distancing them from the community. n87
Once the official function of the police was crime control,  [*729]  departments
"moved away from crime prevention (except as an outcome of arrest),
peacekeeping, order maintenance, and the provision of social and emergency
services." n88 This, along with the isolation of officers from citizens that was
thought necessary to combat corruption, contributed to what various scholars
characterize as "officer alienation from the citizens they serve," officers'
self-conception as "crime fighters and the 'thin blue line,'" and "a warrior
mentality." n89

   An important goal of the professionalism era was to control rank-and-file
officers, leading to extensive and strict rules to govern their conduct,
increased surveillance and oversight of officers, and reduced rank-and-file
officer discretion. n90 The control of the rank-and-file did not end with their
work related duties. Police management also attempted to control the personal
lives of officers in order to reduce the opportunities for corruption. n91
Officers were prohibited "from living in the areas they policed, from incurring
debts, or from being involved in businesses in their areas, as well as required
... to declare the business interests of their families." n92 Some departments
went even further to "de-personalize policing" by frequently reassigning patrol
officers to new neighborhoods far removed from the neighborhoods where officers
lived. n93 These, and a host of other controls, helped spur the creation of
police unions. n94

   A new model of policing, known as community policing, emerged in the late
1970s and early 1980s n95 to put officers back into relationships  [*730]  with
the community and to transform rank-and-file officers into problem solvers. n96
Community policing is a broad concept used to describe a wide variety of
policing approaches. n97 Two common themes among them are that power is pushed
to officers at the lower levels of the organization and that there is increased
involvement with the community. n98 Some versions of community policing embrace
the idea that the social work aspects of policing are important, n99 and
encourage officers to attempt to determine the root causes of crime and to look
beyond the criminal justice system to solve them. n100 Today, most departments
claim that they are engaged in community policing. n101 Yet, police continue to
follow professionalism-era practices for a variety of  [*731]  reasons,
including the growth in quantitative measures of job performance and the
so-called "War on Drugs." n102

   The set of legal and policy changes known as the War on Drugs sought to
eliminate drug sales and use through massive drug arrests and other proactive
policing strategies. As many scholars observed, the War on Drugs fueled racial
disparities in arrest rates and exacerbated negative relationships between the
police and communities of color. n103 Both community policing and the proactive
policing strategies associated with drug enforcement policy required departments
to gather information in order to analyze problems, and technological change
enabled police departments to collect data and use data analysis in personnel
management on an unprecedented scale. n104 This had significant consequences for
how police departments managed line officers and how officers responded. n105

   Quantitative measures rapidly became one of the most significant elements of
contemporary evaluation of police officer job performance. The reliance on
counting stops, arrests, and other measures of law enforcement vigor originated
in New York under the leadership of William Bratton, a proponent of the "broken
windows" theory of policing. n106 The broken windows idea was "that the police
could cut down on serious crimes by making it clear that even the trivial ones
wouldn't go unpunished." n107 To ensure that the rank-and-file implemented this
philosophy, especially in neighborhoods inhabited by indigent people of color,
the New York Police Department ("NYPD")  [*732]  developed a management system
that kept careful track of arrest and crime statistics throughout the City. The
system was called CompStat, short for "compare statistics." n108 The sharp
decline in the number of murders in New York in the late 1990s coincided with
the adoption of CompStat, and so cities across the United States embraced it and
hired chiefs and consultants committed to implementing it, with the result that
"most large American cities [now] use some form of CompStat." n109

   Although some credited CompStat for falling murder and violent crime rates,
by the early 2000s, doubters began to question whether broken windows policing
and the CompStat measure of police work was the cause and some voiced doubts
about the effects it had on police behavior. n110 Eli Silverman, a
police-studies professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, who had been
an early supporter of CompStat, had received a number of letters from NYPD
officers saying that CompStat was not all that it seemed. n111 Silverman and a
fellow criminologist and retired NYPD captain, John Eterno, set out to study how
the system worked. n112

   They surveyed more than 2,000 retired NYPD officers in 2008 and 2012 and
found that CompStat had a substantial effect on police work, but it was not
uniformly positive. n113 They learned that during the CompStat era, officers
"were twice as likely as their predecessors to say that they had been under ...
pressure to increase arrests, and three times as likely to say" they experienced
pressure to issue more summonses. n114 "Most of this activity took place in
minority neighborhoods. In predominantly black Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, for
example, officers issued more than 2,000 summonses a year between 2008 and 2011
to people riding their bicycles on the sidewalk," but "an average of eight bike
tickets a year in predominantly white and notably bike-friendly Park Slope."
n115 The New York Civil Liberties Union calculated that "between 2001 and 2013,
black and Hispanic people  [*733]  were more than four times as likely as whites
to receive summonses for minor violations." n116

   The emphasis on evaluating officers according to arrests, summonses, and
stops and frisks had the perhaps unintended consequence of dissuading officers
from using innovative approaches to crime reduction, even when the innovations
appeared to work. For example, "instead of praising the officer who developed [a
program that appeared to reduce shoplifting], ... the chief told him to 'get
more numbers.'" n117 As one officer complained, "You don't get recognized and
rewarded for helping a homeless person get permanent housing, but you get
recognized for arresting them again and again and again." n118

   The confluence of CompStat, broken windows policing, and the War on Drugs not
only created increasingly negative relationships between the police and
communities of color, but it also negatively influenced the relationship between
the rank-and-file and police management. CompStat, with the pressure it put on
management to reduce the crime rate, led to management pressure on rank-and-file
officers to perform in ways that could be measured. Management exercised more
control and scrutiny over the daily work behaviors of rank-and-file officers.
And, as discussed below, rank-and-file officers who expressed dissatisfaction
with these practices were threatened with poor performance evaluations, given
unpleasant work assignments, and subjected to involuntary transfers and other
negative consequences to their daily work life. For all these reasons,
rank-and-file officers turned to their unions for protection.

   C. Police Unions as a Response to Police Management and Police Department
Structure

 Police officers today belong to a wide array of organizations to represent
their interests. Although in labor law a union is a membership organization that
exists to represent employees for purposes of collective bargaining over
conditions of employment, this Article: uses the term "union" somewhat more
loosely to capture the full range of police labor organizations. Some police
unions today are affiliated with either the Teamsters or the AFL-CIO's
International Union of Police Associations, and these typically have been
certified or recognized as representing all police employees within a bargaining
unit. n119

    [*734]  Other independent police unions developed from local benevolent
associations, protective leagues, federations, lodges, or international police
associations, and these are typically not affiliated with the rest of organized
labor in the United States and may or may not be certified as the exclusive
representative of the officers on whose behalf they negotiate. n120 Some
officers also belong to identity-based police organizations, which sometimes
have close relationships to their civilian counterparts, and these identity or
affinity groups do not have the legal right to bargain collectively on behalf of
their members, as a labor union does, but they may nevertheless play an informal
role in speaking for their members both within the department and publicly. n121
Police unions and identity-based groups within police departments may jointly
take positions on matters of department policy, but sometimes they compete with
each other for rank-and-file support and solidarity. n122

   This section of the Article: discusses the history of police unionization,
the web of contractual and statutory terms governing police working conditions,
and the involvement of police unions in the political and policymaking process.

   1. History of Police Unions

 Police officers in many cities began joining unions in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries when workers in every industry unionized, and for the
same reasons - to improve pay and working conditions and to gain some measure of
control over their work lives. n123 Police in Boston in 1919, for example,
worked regular shifts of between seventy-three and ninety-eight hours a week,
"were sometimes required to remain on duty seventeen hours" a day, had to buy
their own uniforms, and did not receive a raise between 1898 and 1913, even
though the cost of living had doubled. n124 Station houses were unsanitary. n125
Supervisors restricted where officers could go on their scarce free time. n126
Equally as important to police officers and government reformers was the idea
that unions might reduce endemic  [*735]  corruption in local government. n127
John Commons, the leading labor economist of the early twentieth century, found
that labor organizing among municipal employees was the leading antidote to
political machines and corruption because they aided reformers in local
government to set wages, hours, and working conditions without regard to the
personal, economic, and political self-interest of city leaders. n128

   But business and anti-labor groups feared that unionized police would strike
and, more important, would not stop other employees from striking and picketing.
When Boston police formed a union and affiliated with the American Federation of
Labor ("AFL") in August 1919, n129 the chief of police suspended seventeen union
leaders (and two policemen the chief mistakenly believed were union leaders). In
protest nearly three-quarters of the Boston police walked out the next day. n130
Violence and looting ensued. n131 Governor Calvin Coolidge called out troopers
who, after firing into the crowd killing nine and wounding twenty-three more,
stopped the looting and prevented support for the striking police from turning
into a citywide general strike. n132 The violence caused a panic about strikes
by police or any other government employees, which resulted in the collapse of
all AFL-affiliated police union locals and a huge backlash against government
employee unions generally and police unions in particular. n133 As a result, the
unionization of government employees that had begun in the Progressive Era
ground to a halt, only to really pick up steam in the post-World War II period
as government employees' earnings were outstripped by factory and skilled labor
earnings and the growth of private sector unionization eventually made it seem
that government employee unions were both desirable and inevitable. n134

    [*736]  Police officers formed local unions in various cities in the 1940s,
and some police unions affiliated with national labor federations, including the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees ("AFSCME"), founded
in 1932, and some with the national federations of police officers, including
the Fraternal Order of Police ("FOP"), founded in 1915. n135 States began to
enact laws permitting government employee collective bargaining in the late
1950s. Wisconsin was the first in 1959. n136 However, well into the 1960s,
police departments routinely fired officers who attempted to unionize n137 and
courts upheld the power of cities to ban officers from joining unions. n138 In
the absence of any legal right to unionize or bargain collectively, government
employee unions became adept at securing their members' interests through
political activity and negotiating informal agreements with public officials.
n139

   Unions finally succeeded in gaining a lasting foothold in American police
departments in the late 1960s, as rank-and-file officers felt attacked by the
civil rights movement's focus on police brutality and racism and by federal
court decisions limiting police officers' investigatory and arrest powers. n140
Officers also did not have protection within the department when they were
investigated or accused of misconduct and felt they had no way to present
grievances to management. n141 Furthermore, they feared that civilian review
boards would scapegoat individual rank-and-file officers for practices that
management encouraged or even required. n142 Then, as now, officers believed
[*737]  that discipline was meted out only to those who criticized management.
n143

   Not surprisingly, unions representing rank-and-file officers negotiated for
contractual protections against discipline and lobbied legislators to
incorporate these protections in legislation, including LEOBORs. n144 They
sought to protect officer autonomy, effectiveness, and safety by opposing
constitutional criminal procedure restrictions on police conduct and by blocking
civilian oversight of police discipline. n145 The legacy of the 1960s is
collective bargaining agreements and LEOBORs, which make it difficult to
investigate and punish officers, and limited civilian oversight, all of which
can impede reform efforts. n146

   2. Elements of Police Union Contracts

 Police union contracts contain provisions regarding wages, benefits, and
discipline. n147 Police officers, like all government employees, have statutory
and constitutional rights to fair treatment in personnel decisions. n148
However, police protection exceeds that provided to workers in other industries.
In addition to the rights enjoyed by all government employees, police officers
in at least sixteen states have special statutory protections from LEOBORs. n149
And even in states or cities that have not enacted a LEOBOR, similar provisions
are often included in union contracts. n150

    [*738]  As a matter of labor law in most states, unions are selected and
govern on a majority rule principle. Under that principle, the union chosen by
the majority of employees in a job classification or department, what is
generally known as a "bargaining unit," is the exclusive representative of all
the employees in that unit. n151 The purpose of majority rule and exclusive
representation is to strengthen and legitimize the employee representative by
enabling it to speak with one voice and to enable the employees, within their
union, to agree on priorities and resolve differences. n152 Law limits the
ability of the majority representative to sacrifice the interests of the
minority by imposing a duty of fair representation, which requires the union to
represent all employees in the unit fairly and competently and prohibits the
union and its officers from engaging in arbitrary action or invidious
discrimination against individuals or the minority. n153

   When police officers gained the right to unionize and bargain collectively in
the 1960s, union leadership embraced the language of professionalism that police
management and an earlier generation of police reformers had used, insisting
that the purpose of the police was to control crime. n154 However, police unions
responded to the extensive rules and regulations controlling rank-and-file
behavior by negotiating their own set of rules and regulations to protect
rank-and-file officers from arbitrary exercises of management power. n155 Unions
challenged exercises of managerial prerogative through grievance arbitration,
and protected members' economic interests and working conditions by advocating
for favorable "wages and benefits; job security; hiring, retention, promotion,
and disciplinary processes; [and] access to 'good' jobs, shifts, assignments,
[and] overtime." n156 As one labor lawyer opined, "It is nearly impossible to
have a situation in which a creative police organizer cannot find a rule,
regulation, guideline, budget provision, benefit program rule, or personnel
procedure which cannot be exploited to significantly increase the rights and
benefits of working officers." n157 Professionalism era reforms, with its host
of controls, not  [*739]  only helped spur the creation of police unions but
also "were directly responsible for the shape and functions of police unions as
well." n158

   Police collective bargaining agreements look in part like the labor
agreements negotiated by a wide range of public and private sector unions. They
contain provisions governing economic terms of employment, including wages,
hours, sickness and vacation leave, pensions, health insurance, death benefits,
and so forth. n159 There are typically detailed provisions governing overtime
compensation, payment when called to testify, compensation for purchasing
uniforms, and the right to have protective equipment like bullet-proof vests.
n160 They prohibit discrimination on the basis of union membership, race,
religion, gender, and so on, and generally require just cause for discipline and
discharge. n161 They create a grievance process usually culminating in
arbitration. n162 Given the history of rank-and-file concern about arbitrary
[*740]  management discipline for violations of detailed rules, it is
unsurprising that many union contracts include quite specific provisions
protecting police officers in discipline cases. n163 But union contracts have
little to say about how police officers actually do their job. This is in part
because police unions, like other public and private sector unions in the 1960s,
focused on gaining the power to bargain over economic issues, promotions, and
discipline. n164 But it is also because state legislatures, courts, and public
employee relations boards insisted that it is the province of management to
decide the mission and methods of public work, and the only things on which
labor has a right to negotiate are pay, promotion, and protection against
discipline. n165 That police unions adopted a narrow conception of the union's
role in collaborating with management about policing policy and tactics is not
surprising, given the dominant conception of policing and the business unionism
of the mid-twentieth century. The top-down hierarchy in police departments
allowed for little input by the rank-and-file, and labor law and labor policy
excluded employees from meaningful voice in the goals of the organization. n166

   An example of this hierarchy in practice is the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act
("MMBA"), n167 the California statute governing police labor relations that is
relatively typical of state labor relations statutes. n168 The scope of the
union's right to negotiate and represent public employees includes



    all matters relating to employment conditions and employer-employee
relations, including, but not limited to, wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment, except,  [*741]  however, that the scope of
representation shall not include consideration of the merits, necessity, or
organization of any service or activity provided by law or executive order. n169



    The two clauses conflict - read alone, they could respectively "encompass
practically any conceivable bargaining proposal" or "swallow the whole provision
for collective negotiation and relegate determination of all labor issues to the
city's discretion." n170 Even if an employer's action or policy has a
significant and adverse effect on the employees' wages, hours, and working
conditions, the employer may be exempt from the duty to meet and confer with the
union if the subject is the "merits, necessity, or organization" of government
action. n171 Added in 1968, the limitation on the union's right to confer over
these matters "was intended to 'forestall any expansion of the language of
"wages, hours and working conditions" to include more general managerial policy
decisions.'" n172

   Police officers in California, therefore, are able to bargain for the right
to consult with a union representative or attorney prior to making a report
concerning any shooting incident involving an officer. In Long Beach Police
Officer Ass'n v. City of Long Beach, n173 the City Police Chief "issued a
directive prohibiting the City's police officers who became involved in a
shooting from consulting with a representative of the [association] or an
attorney prior to the filing of a written or oral report concerning such
incident" because previous instances had resulted in interference with the
Department's investigation. n174 The court found the right to consult was a
"working condition" under the collective bargaining agreement rather than a
matter reserved for management which would permit the Department to change
practices without prior written agreement or compliance with statutory meet and
confer procedures. n175

    [*742]  However, although a police officer is allowed to have a
representative after a shooting has occurred, policies governing the use of
force before a shooting are not subject to bargaining under the MMBA. In San
Jose Peace Officer's Ass'n v. City of San Jose, n176 a California appellate
court found that the police chief's issuance of a new policy governing the use
of force without meeting and conferring with the association did not violate the
MMBA. Although a change on the policy governing a police officer's ability to
"fire at a suspected criminal" has "some effect" on safety, it is "equally true"
that the "use of force policy is as closely akin to a managerial decision as any
decision can be in running a police department, surpassed only by the decision
as to whether force will be used at all." n177 According to the court, there are
"few decisions more 'managerial' in nature than the one which involves the
conditions under which an entity of the state will permit a human life to be
taken." n178

   Police unions have been excluded under this law from involvement in certain
proceedings of civilian review commissions. In Berkeley Police Ass'n v. City of
Berkeley, n179 Berkeley established, through an initiative, a civilian police
review commission. n180 The function of the commission was to "provide for
community participation in setting and reviewing police department policies,
practices, and procedures and to provide a means for prompt, impartial and fair
investigation of complaints brought by individuals against the Berkeley Police
Department." n181 The chief of police announced that a member of the commission
would attend Department Board of Review hearings during which bureau reports
were discussed, and send a representative of the Department to each police
review commission trial board meeting who would "take with him a copy of any
bureau reports that had been prepared concerning individuals who were being
investigated by the police review commission and answer questions of commission
members concerning the department's position on the complaints." n182 The court
noted that the police association was fundamentally challenging the "announced
policies" of their chief officer "concerning ... police-community relations,"
and "these policies clearly constitute management  [*743]  level decisions which
are not properly within the scope of union representation and collective
bargaining." n183

   Although a police association is able to bargain for the right of an officer
to consult with a union representative or attorney prior to making a report
concerning any shooting incident involving the officer, n184 a police department
can prevent officers from "huddling" together before making reports. In Ass'n
for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs v. County of Los Angeles, n185 the Department
instituted an anti-huddling policy, where officers would gather in groups of two
or more with a union representation, "i.e., two or more deputies consulting at
the same time with the same legal counsel/labor representative." n186 The City
created a policy where individuals involved, including witnesses, could not
discuss the shooting amongst themselves, but still had the right to meet with
counsel individually. n187 The court found that the revision "had no effect on
wages and hours." n188 In contrast, the court found that "the Department's
express objective in implementing its policy revision was to collect accurate
information regarding deputy-involved shootings. Plainly, the purpose of the
policy revision was to foster greater public trust in the investigatory
process," and was a fundamental managerial decision. n189 Finally, in a recent
case, a county's adoption of a policy to limit a deputy sheriff's access the
internal investigative file before being interviewed by an internal affairs
investigator was found not to be a working condition subject to bargaining under
the MMBA. n190

   While it is understandable that California, like other states, would want to
free police departments from the leverage a union might have to block reforms
through prolonged bargaining and through inclusion of contract terms that could
thwart new policies, the consequence of  [*744]  the limited duty to bargain has
been perverse. If employees and their union are excluded from participation in
policy-setting, they often feel compelled to oppose new policies for fear that
the policy will be implemented punitively or unfairly as a way to discipline
rank-and-file who are unpopular with management. n191 In the case of police, as
scholars have shown, unions become reflexively opposed to policies when they
cannot participate in policy design, and focus instead simply on protecting
their members from discipline for violating the policy. n192 Thus, both the law
and the dominant theory of policing compel union leadership to focus their
attention on rectifying the abuses of management: arbitrary dismissals,
scheduling, and work assignments; informal discipline; citation and arrest
quotas; cronyism in promotions; and incursions into officers' personal lives.

   3. Police Unions and the Political Process

 While police unions adopted a narrow view of labor's role in setting criminal
justice policy in the workplace, apart from officer pay and discipline, they
embraced a broad view of how they could advocate for police officers' interests
as labor. They do not just bargain and enforce labor agreements; they are
involved in electoral politics, in litigation, and in the media, attacking the
restrictions imposed on them by the Supreme Court, criticizing groups ranging
from the Black Lives Matter movement to the Communist Party to the American
Civil Liberties Union ("ACLU"), and opposing civilian oversight. n193 And in
advocating for police interests as labor to be protected from civilian
intervention and unfair discipline, of course, they did have a substantial
impact on criminal justice policy. That is, although unions did not contest
management efforts to adopt the militarized style of urban policing instead of a
more social service or community-oriented style, they did demand that officers
be protected from discipline when that harsh style of policing resulted in
civilian injuries or deaths. Police  [*745]  unions negotiated for contractual
protections in the disciplinary process and also lobbied for state or municipal
laws giving officers procedural protections during discipline. n194

   Police unions also actively opposed reform-oriented chiefs and civilian
review boards, both for reasons of conservative and sometimes racist ideology
and to protect police officers' bread-and-butter interests, like pay, benefits,
and job security. n195 In several cities, police unions have challenged police
chiefs brought in to enact reforms that they consider threatening to officer
safety or economic interests, or that they believe weaken public safety. Unions
challenged city officials over issues like staffing and job protection. Many
have taken openly partisan stands - such as recent police protests in New York -
[*746]  against politicians who they claim adopt policies that weaken public
safety. n196 Because police officers have long felt at risk of arbitrary or
unfair discipline, they have fought hard to retain union involvement in internal
investigations into employee misconduct, and therefore have stymied efforts to
reform police culture. n197 The January 2017 DOJ Chicago Report, for example,
noted that a 1994 effort to use data to identify patterns of problematic officer
behavior was opposed by the union because officers felt discipline was imposed
arbitrarily and unfairly; the system was abandoned after just two years, and all
the data and reports it produced "went missing." n198 A 2016 effort to analyze
data and create an early intervention system is in the works, but the DOJ
Chicago Report stated:



    The project managers are taking guidance from the City on how and when to do
so - and union involvement has not yet occurred. There is no evidence that the
City or CPD engaged with the unions early on, before beginning this new effort,
to determine whether CPD's unions will support the new effort. n199



    As these examples suggest, unions have been blocked, by labor law, by the
hierarchical management structure, and by short-sighted union leaders' own
narrow conception of role, from adopting a more proactive and collaborative
approach to management-labor cooperation over police goals and tactics.

   In sum, police unions see their mission as protecting the interests of police
officers, including protecting officers from discipline, ensuring good working
conditions, and protecting seniority. When police union leaders defend officers
involved in what appear to be egregious instances of violence toward suspects,
critics assert that the solidarity that enables a union to function, and that is
encouraged by the quasi-militaristic culture in many police forces, has become
pathological. n200 Whereas unions are thought by their defenders to be an
institutional mechanism to create and sustain workplace democracy in other work
[*747]  settings, law enforcement unions are perceived as irredeemably
oligarchic and implacably opposed to even modest reform and to anything that
might weaken the influence of union leaders. n201

   II. Police Unions as Obstacles to Reform

 Police unions in New York City, Ferguson, Baltimore, Cleveland, Chicago, and
other cities have, at least initially, publicly come to the defense of officers
accused of shooting and killing civilians, insisting that it is important to
avoid a "rush to judgment." n202 Reponses have gone beyond offering a public
defense to include fundraising for accused officers in Ferguson, Baltimore, and
Cleveland, n203 and, in New York City, proclaiming "it is time to stop the
amateur video activists who interfere with police operations" by recording
arrests and police violence. n204 Though New York Patrolmen's Benevolent
Association ("PBA") President Patrick Lynch uses extreme rhetoric in his defense
of officers, n205 refusing to publicly concede that an officer was wrong,
[*748]  even when the officer in question went to jail, n206 his milder
statements about the role of the police union are not unusual among police union
leaders. He says what most do: "Our job, as an advocate for police officers, is
to speak out for them, whether it's getting them a contract or defending them
when they're wrongfully accused, or explaining exactly how and why we do our
job. That's our role, and we proudly do it." n207

   Although it is understandable that elected union leaders come to the defense
of employees accused of misconduct, the zeal and leverage that police unions
bring to the defense is considerable. As a result of contractual and statutory
substantive and procedural protections, the expense and hassle necessary to
discipline an officer is greater than if the officer could be fired at will.
n208 This, combined with the fact that labor arbitrators sometimes reduce
punishment, "makes supervisors less likely to impose disciplinary sanctions
because while a supervisor faces a possible headache for not disciplining a
misbehaving subordinate, they face a certain headache if they do." n209

   One study of discipline imposed in the CPD in the early 1990s found that
arbitrators "routinely cut in half" the severity of discipline. n210 Experience
with the personnel system prompted Tom Nolan, a veteran of the Boston Police
Department and professor of criminology, to say: "The number one impediment to
reforming policing in the United States are police unions." n211 Similarly, in
2016, the Chicago Police Accountability Task Force issued a report concluding
that "the collective bargaining agreements between the police unions and the
City have essentially turned the code of silence into official policy." n212 As
explained in this Part, statutory and contractual protections for police  [*749]
officers do have an effect on police accountability and the transparency of
police disciplinary systems. n213 For instance, collective bargaining agreements
often contain provisions that protect officers accused of misconduct, shield
them from civilian oversight, and limit the ability to change officers'
conditions of employment, which also makes it difficult to enact reforms such as
setting up early warning systems. n214

   A. Statutory and Contractual Limits on Discipline and Transparency

 In the wake of extensive news coverage of and social media outrage about police
shootings from 2014 through 2017, a group affiliated with Black Lives Matter
launched a project known as Campaign Zero in part to draw public attention to
job protections for police officers accused of misconduct. n215 Campaign Zero
compiled a database of police union contracts for over eighty American cities,
including every major city and a significant number of smaller cities, by
obtaining the contracts through Freedom of Information Act requests. n216
Another source of recent data about police union contracts comes from a breach
of the website of the country's largest police union, the FOP. Hackers obtained
and then leaked to The Guardian newspaper nearly two decades' worth of police
union contracts, apparently wanting to draw attention to contractual protections
that made it more difficult to discipline officers accused of misconduct. n217 A
third important source of police union contracts was compiled by Professor
Stephen Rushin. n218

    [*750]  All three of these sources of police union contracts reveal several
contractual or statutory job protections that are potentially problematic for
reform efforts. Some slow down misconduct investigations, prevent public access
to complaints and disciplinary records, and enable the destruction of complaints
and disciplinary records after a negotiated period of time. n219 Procedural
protections for officers during interrogation can make it difficult for
investigators to recover accurate information about uses of force. Transparency
about how misconduct allegations are handled and accountability for officers who
engage in misconduct are hampered by limits on civilian oversight, short
statutes of limitation for misconduct charges against officers, and restrictions
on which complaints will be investigated, including refusing to investigate
anonymous complaints. n220 In the approximately twenty states with statutory
LEOBORs, many of these protections exist as a matter of state law and thus even
elimination of the police union or its contract would not immediately change the
law unless the statute were repealed as well. n221 This Article: highlights the
contractual and statutory protections that pose the most significant obstacles
to reforms. The power of police unions to negotiate over terms of employment and
disciplinary processes, which is at the core of the collective bargaining
process in any unionized workplace, will be essential to consider in any serious
approach to police reform.

   Timing and Conduct of Interrogation. Most collective bargaining agreements
and state LEOBORs outline the process for investigating allegations of officer
misconduct, although the process varies. n222 Maryland, for example, provides
that no officer may be questioned without having been given the opportunity to
secure legal counsel and gives officers ten days to do so. n223 This provision
has been criticized for giving officers plenty of time to delay interrogations
and concoct an account of the incident that exonerates the officer. n224 Other
provisions on officer interrogation include regulation of the location, length,
and timing of interrogations. n225

    [*751]  Handling of Personnel Files. Officer personnel files contain records
of complaints and their outcomes. Issues concerning those files include whether
the public should have access to any of them and, if so, what information should
be disclosed. Additional issues include whether records should be expunged after
a period of time and, if so, which records and for what length of time. n226

   Proposed legislation that failed to pass in California in 2016 would have
increased public access to police disciplinary records that have been restricted
by state law and limited by court decisions. n227 The bill would have required
public access to records of all investigations into uses of force that result in
death or serious injury. n228 The records would be open even if the officer
involved eventually was found to have complied with a department's policy. n229
Currently, the LAPD only releases summaries, and some departments don't even
provide a summary. n230 The bill would also have required that other reports and
findings be made public when officers are found to have engaged in misconduct
that violates the legal rights of the public. n231 A similar bill failed to pass
in 2007 "after dozens of peace officers testified to lawmakers that permitting
public access to police disciplinary files would endanger lives." n232 Yet,
according to a news report, there has been no reported case where an officer was
harmed based on release of this information. n233 Other police departments,
including Baltimore, similarly do not release notice of disciplinary actions and
their disposition. n234

   In contrast, at least ten states including Texas and Florida already "provide
public access to investigative details, findings, and disciplinary actions when
officers are found to have acted improperly." n235 Since 2014, Dallas has
maintained websites listing every officer-involved shooting and every officer
use of force in response to resistance since 2008 along with the location, the
name of the subject,  [*752]  whether the subject was armed, and the name or
badge number, race, and gender of the officers involved. n236

   The challenge with public access to disciplinary records is balancing
transparency with protection of legitimate privacy and safety interests of
police officers. From one point of view, transparency is clearly desirable as
the public should be able to monitor how public employees are disciplined, and
this is especially important to restoring public trust in police. n237 From
another, the value of transparency is a function of the reliability of the
records. Police officers who feel that discipline is used unfairly to punish
officers or is meted out based on favoritism or for other nonmeritorious reasons
would conclude that public accessibility of the records will only compound the
harm of the unfair discipline by stigmatizing an officer and might facilitate
reprisals if the officer's name and home address are released. n238 Conversely,
officers who feel that discipline is fair might still be reluctant to allow
their name to be publicized, but at least recognize that public awareness is not
unreasonable or grossly unfair. n239

   As for expungement, many cities allow for expungement of complaints. n240
Baltimore's union contract allows officers to request expungement of formal
complaints that are found to be unfounded or as to which the officer was
exonerated after three years. n241 Some policing scholars assert that
expungement of unfounded complaints is undesirable because such records are part
of early intervention systems mandated by DOJ consent decrees. These systems
create a computerized record of multiple performance indicators, including uses
of force and citizen complaints, that allow supervisors and oversight entities
to have a full picture of every officer's job performance. n242

   Civilian Complaints and Oversight. Some LEOBORs and contracts impose short
statutes of limitations on the prosecution of discipline. n243  [*753]  In
Maryland, for example, no complaint alleging brutality will be investigated or
be the basis of discipline if filed more than ninety days after the alleged
incident. n244 Others treat citizen complaints differently than complaints
initiated by other officers. n245 Other provisions limit civilian oversight.
n246 For many police unions, limiting civilian oversight is one of their most
important issues. n247

   Misconduct Investigations. Several types of contractual and statutory
provisions governing investigations have been criticized. One provision concerns
the timing of such investigations and who should conduct them. n248 Other
constellations of concerns focus on control of the hearing boards that determine
whether officers have committed misconduct. n249 In Los Angeles in the decades
before the Rampart scandal, rank-and-file officers believed that the Board of
Rights was controlled by the chief who used it to punish whistleblowers and
dissenters. n250 In Baltimore, perhaps for a similar reason, the union
negotiated a contractual provision requiring that one member of every hearing
board be a peer officer of the accused. n251 A critic, however,  [*754]
insisted that "including a peer officer as a member of the Hearing Board serves
to protect misconduct" because "giving the rank and file a direct voice in
disciplinary investigation ... necessarily lowers the standards for police
conduct" inasmuch as officers have "a vested interest in shielding all officers
from meaningful investigations and discipline." n252 Other provisions concern
whether the public should receive notice of the disposition of investigations.
n253

   The provisions highlighted above can be obstacles to reforms in that they
make it harder for supervisors, civilian oversight boards, and the public to
determine the nature and extent of police misconduct, to develop early
intervention systems to help officers who are at risk of committing future
abuse, and to remove officers who have committed egregious misconduct. Police
unions, however, have defended these provisions. The FOP, for example, said
these types of provisions are necessary to protect officers from unfounded
citizen complaints. n254 As the former President of the Federal Agents' Police
Benevolent Association and founder of the National Police Defense Foundation, a
nonprofit that provides legal services to members of law enforcement, put it:
"What is happening now is police are second-guessing their instincts and
training they have because they're scared to get indicted, that they may have to
go to jail for doing their job." n255 This alleged reluctance to do the job,
which some have called the Ferguson Effect, n256 is the latest iteration of a
longstanding argument that unions are necessary to protect police from the
anti-police rhetoric.

   As explained further in Parts III and IV, police unions have fought hard for
many of these procedural and substantive protections because they do not trust
the process of adopting and implementing policies. But reform will not be
accomplished simply by eliminating job protections, even if that were
politically feasible. Nor will reform be accomplished simply by involving the
public in negotiating over job protections, at least so long as the
rank-and-file retain the collective will to resist reforms, discipline is
subject to grievance arbitration, and  [*755]  negotiating disputes are subject
to interest arbitration. And it is politically infeasible (and may well be
unwise) to eliminate a process to appeal discipline. Rather, rank-and-file need
to be involved in improving police practices, and that involvement very likely
requires the cooperation of some kind of officer labor representative.

   B. Other Limits on Reform

   1. Changing Conditions of Employment

 In addition to protection against discipline, accountability, and transparency,
many states have laws that require management to collectively bargain over any
changes to conditions of employment. n257 This requirement can also stymie
reform efforts. For instance, federal law empowers the DOJ to bring structural
reform litigation against police departments engaged in a "pattern or practice"
of civil rights abuses. n258 Most of the investigations conducted by the DOJ
have resulted in consent decrees that are approved and overseen by federal
courts. n259 An investigation of seventeen of these consent decrees negotiated
between 1997 and 2016 found that in at least seven of them, the union contract
with the city hindered the reforms contained in the consent decree. n260

   Unsurprisingly, unions, and sometimes classes of union members, have filed
grievances when these reforms change working conditions. In Seattle, for
instance, two police unions filed a lawsuit in 2013 arguing that "certain topics
that have long been subjected to bargaining - including conditions for
employment ... could be severely curtailed by the city's proposed police reform
plan." n261 The plan included provisions that the Seattle Police Department
("SPD") would be monitored to determine "whether all use of force is reported[,]
... tracked, and properly classified, and thoroughly and objectively
investigated and reviewed to a reasonable and unbiased conclusion," and also
"whether disciplinary results on founded complaints reflect the seriousness of
the underlying event ... with biased policing, excessive  [*756]  force, failure
to report force, or dishonesty meriting appropriate discipline." n262 The
lawsuit asked the court to "permanently block the city and court monitor from
making any changes to police officers' wages, hours, or working conditions."
n263 DOJ consent decrees aimed at reform of police departments often include
language providing that any reforms can only occur to the extent that they do
not conflict with the union contract. n264 These provisions can delay or
permanently hinder reform efforts. n265

   2. Union Structure

 Unions are run by an elected president and board of directors. n266 In large
departments, the individuals holding these full-time paid positions control a
multimillion-dollar budget amassed from union dues. n267 This gives them
enormous power to influence public policy because they can donate a portion of
these funds to politicians viewed as friendly to their interests. n268 A case in
point is Seattle.

   The Seattle Police Officers' Guild ("SPOG"), the union of rank-and-file
officers, endorsed Ed Murray for Mayor in 2013 and contributed $ 15,000 to his
campaign. n269 Upon his taking office, one of his first  [*757]  acts was to
demote the interim chief of the department, a man who had enacted numerous
reforms that had been praised in a report by the federal court monitor of the
DOJ consent decree. n270 Additionally, the report praised an assistant chief who
also retired suddenly. n271 The Mayor then appointed the former Vice President
of SPOG, Harry Bailey, as interim police chief. n272 Bailey immediately
attempted to overturn misconduct findings of numerous officers found guilty of
using excessive force. n273

   The perception that SPOG captured the Mayor existed not only amongst
reformers, but also amongst some members of the rank-and-file. The Mayor's
actions created "an atmosphere of fear." n274 One officer opined that the former
Chief and Assistant Chief who the Mayor forced out were



    people who have a deep institutional knowledge of the organization, have
been there a long time and earned their way to the top, and have been chipping
away at deficiencies for three years ... [.] After a long struggle to make this
a better organization, boom, they are all gone. You bring in new people who are
less experienced, and you give them the same task, but you have erased that last
few years of work. n275



    Another officer, who wanted to remain anonymous to avoid the possibility of
retribution, stated:



    If the people who have been opposing the federal court monitor and reform
are elevated, ... there is a risk in working hard to achieve reform. It sends a
message that is, at best, confusing about whether they want reform to be
successful. Why would you put the fox in charge of the henhouse? ... Any risk
they take may piss off the folks who are in charge.

   I think a lot of us were quite stunned ... . The mood was shock - complete
shock - because everyone who was involved in reform was gone or buried. People
just stopped talking. n276



    These quotes reveal how union leadership can stymie reform by stifling the
voices of rank-and-file members who may support reform  [*758]  efforts. The
perception that the Mayor was in bed with the union and his actions in demoting
and forcing out individuals who were working with the DOJ to institute reforms
created fear, silenced more progressive voices amongst the rank-and-file, and
made them reluctant to engage in reform-oriented efforts.

   Similar suppression of rank-and-file voices occurred in San Francisco,
according to a Blue Ribbon Panel appointed by the District Attorney after it was
discovered that members of the police department had exchanged racist and
homophobic text messages. n277 Among the panel's findings was that the union
dissuaded officers from speaking to the panel and many who did speak to the
panel did so anonymously because they feared retaliation from the union and had
concerns about their physical safety. n278

   The union can also hinder reforms by capturing police management, thereby
eliminating any checks and balances with the department. This arguably occurred
in Seattle when the former vice president of the union was elevated to the
position of police chief. n279 In San Francisco, the Blue Ribbon Panel concluded
that there was virtually no distinction between the command staff of the
department and the police officer's union. n280 This made it difficult to engage
in reforms because the union was essentially running the department and it had
historically taken antireformist positions. n281

   Finally, one way for union leadership to maintain their power and influence
is to convince rank-and-file officers to join the union and pay union dues. As
such, they must justify why the union is important for officers, and one
persuasive way to do so is to encourage the rank-and-file to believe that they
cannot trust management and that management is out to get them. This narrative
is easy to maintain because the hierarchical structure of most police
departments limits contact between command staff and the rank-and-file. n282

   In sum, collective bargaining agreements, including seniority systems, union
power over conditions of work, and the structure and incentives of police unions
can all be barriers to reform. n283 However, this  [*759]  does not mean that
unions and rank-and-file officers always find reform efforts problematic. Next,
this Article: provides evidence that unions can be important partners in reform
efforts.

   III. Police Unions as Agents of Police Reform

 In theory, police unions could be agents of reform in at least two ways. First,
as representatives of the line officers who have daily contact with the
community whom the police are supposed to protect and serve, unions could help
improve the relationship between police and citizens, and help ensure that force
is used wisely and prudently, and that arrests are made and citations issued
only when doing so actually improves life for the community. Second, unions
could become intermediaries to convey the concerns of line personnel to
management in a way that will improve policing. But to do either of those,
unions would have to develop genuine and sustained enthusiasm for improving the
quality of policing. n284

   Given the prevailing wisdom that police unions are irredeemably opposed to
reforms, it is surprising to learn that while unions fight hard to ward off
discipline for some members, n285 doing so does not necessarily equate with an
antireformist position when it comes to matters unrelated to officer discipline.
There is evidence of police unions occasionally working to facilitate reforms
that improve the quality of policing. Here we offer a few examples and then draw
some generalizations from them.

   A. Examples of Police Unions as Agents of Reform

 A number of cities at various points over the last fifty years have implemented
reforms to reduce police violence and improve police-community relations. All of
them involved the cooperation of the rank-and-file, and many involved active
cooperation with the union.

   An early example is the "Friday Crab Club" of the Berkeley Police Department,
which was organized by Chief August Vollmer in the  [*760]  early 1900s. n286
This group consisted of rank-and-file officers who met with the Chief on a
weekly basis to review police actions, including uses of force. n287 Officers
who had used force were required to explain their behaviors and the group would
decide whether the force was justified. n288 The group also invited experts and
members of the community, including those accused of criminal conduct, to
address them. n289 "Advocates of community policing hold up the Friday Crab Club
as a paradigm for collegial peer review that will 'unleash[] [the] human
potential that lies at the core of community policing and problem oriented
policing.'" n290

   Another example occurred during the 1960s and 1970s when the Oakland police
department was struggling with violent encounters with citizens. n291 Chief
Charles Gain was a reformist chief who had strong support from the Black
community, but not much from the union. n292 He pushed through many reforms
despite union opposition. n293 Many officers resigned or retired under his
leadership and the newly formed union issued a vote of no confidence. n294
Despite his strong leadership style, Chief Gain created the Violence Prevention
Unit with the help of social psychologist Hans Toch, to address the problem of
violence-prone officers. n295 The Unit diverged from the otherwise hierarchical
organization of the police department and Chief Gain maintained a hands-off
approach and allowed the Unit to function independently. n296 The Unit was based
on two assumptions: first, that patrol officers could control other officers,
and second, that those officers who had been violent in the past would be in the
best position to help officers who were having problems in the present. n297 The
Unit was successful in two ways - officers participated with great enthusiasm
and caring, and the work of the panel reduced violent confrontations  [*761]
between the police and citizens. n298 As with many such reforms, however, it was
discontinued due to department budget cuts. n299 And almost as soon as it was,
police violence problems recurred. n300

   One more example is from Milwaukee in the 1960s and 1970s. Despite the fact
that the police chief, Harold Brier, had no interest in improving relations with
the Black community, the union saw things differently. n301 The union recognized
that its members were on the street as line officers and that they were the ones
who suffered from the antagonism from the Black community. n302 So the union
organized meetings with citizen groups using community relations techniques then
in vogue. n303 Like the Oakland experiment, however, the program soon faded. In
Milwaukee, unlike in Oakland, the Police Department never formalized the program
and never made funds available to reimburse officers for time spent with citizen
groups. n304 Although the government's Law Enforcement Administration Assistance
("LEAA") program used to give grants to police departments that were interested
in developing community relations programs, it excluded unions. n305 In the
years since, "LEAA has been replaced by several funding bureaus within the" DOJ,
but these new bureaus still will not fund union projects. n306

   The Metro-Dade Police-Citizen Violence Reduction Project is another example
of rank-and-file officer involvement in police reform. The Project involved a
task force made up of officers, management, and others who were tasked with
reviewing a random sample of citizen complaints involving "police abuse,
officers' use of force," and officer injuries during police-citizen
interactions. n307 Based on the lessons they learned from this review, a new
training program involving role-plays was developed and implemented. n308 The
preliminary results from the training program showed a thirty to fifty percent
reduction  [*762]  "in injuries to officers, officers' use of force, and
citizens' complaints of abuse." n309

   Occasionally, police unions have formed alliances with civil rights leaders
or their organizations. In Los Angeles, the Police Protective League ("PPL") ("a
notoriously inward-looking organization") commissioned a report by law professor
and civil liberties activist Erwin Chemerinsky. n310 They did so because the
union's members feared reprisals by the controversial new chief of police,
Bernard Parks, whom some League leaders believed would draw the wrong lessons
from a corruption scandal in the LAPD's Rampart Division. n311

   In Newark, New Jersey, union president James Stewart helped the DOJ during
its investigation of the police department. According to him, the "union's
attitude was 'come on in,'" and it helped the DOJ uncover problems within the
police department, including "frequent pedestrian stops that violated residents'
civil rights three out of every four times they occurred." n312 Stewart even
indicated that he "approves of DOJ-mandated reforms related to the department's
officer training and community relations." n313 Simultaneously, however, Stewart
strongly opposed any reforms that would create a civilian review board. n314 The
union threatened to bring a lawsuit, arguing that changes to officer discipline
must be part of collective bargaining. n315

   In Los Angeles, the LAPD created a Community Safety Partnership unit that
operates in some of the most dangerous and violent housing developments. n316
The officers in the unit patrol the neighborhoods on foot and know residents by
name. n317 They also earn the trust  [*763]  of the community by providing
social services to residents as well as participating in neighborhood
activities. n318 Additionally, unlike the ubiquitous practice of promoting
officers based on the numbers of arrests they make, officers in this unit are
rewarded for diverting people from the criminal justice system and fostering
positive relationships in the community. n319 While it is unclear how much the
union was involved in these efforts, it did not file any grievances to stop the
program or dissuade rank-and-file officers from participating in it.

   Surprisingly, the experience in Seattle also provides an example of how
unions can work to facilitate reforms. In 2014, after some of the events
discussed in Section II.C, Ron Smith was elected as the new President of SPOG.
During his time in office from 2014 to 2016, SPOG continued to vociferously
defend and protect officers who were accused of misconduct. n320 However, Smith
simultaneously worked closely and collaboratively with the new Police Chief,
Kathleen O'Toole, and with reformers outside the department, to implement
DOJ-mandated reforms. n321 The consent decree between the City and the DOJ,
which was in place for two years by the time Smith was elected, required the
adoption of extensive reforms to curb excessive force and racially biased
policing. n322 In a move that was remarkable to outside observers, Smith told
his membership that bias-free policing was important and if they did not like
it, they could "leave and go to a place that serves [their] worldview." n323
This is from the same union that had, in 2010, "described efforts to combat
racial profiling as 'socialist policies' from 'the enemy' and argued that
officers should be able to call citizens 'bitch' and 'n***a.'" n324

    [*764]  Negotiations on the collective bargaining agreement between SPOG and
the City began in 2015. n325 These negotiations had to be completed before
reforms under the consent decree could continue because some of the measures to
improve police accountability potentially conflicted with the current contract.
n326 During the negotiations, SPOG President Smith was supportive of adopting
some accountability measures that would lead to more transparency. For instance,
he supported changes to the collective bargaining agreement that would have
opened disciplinary hearings to certain outsiders, including a citizen observer
appointed by the mayor and members of the Community Police Commission ("CPC").
n327 The CPC is a group created by the DOJ consent decree n328 made up primarily
of community groups, including the ACLU and the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People ("NAACP"), that had asked the DOJ to investigate
the SPD. n329 The CPC also has a guaranteed spot for a representative from SPOG
and from the Seattle Police Management Association. n330

   Under Smith's leadership, SPOG did not file any grievances or do anything
else to block any of the reform efforts. n331 One of the co-chairs of the CPC,
Lisa Daugaard, noted that during the reform process, "things could have gone
terribly with SPOG, but [didn't]." n332 She continued:



    To the surprise of many including me, ... SPOG really has not impeded the
reform process. There were many points  [*765]  along the way when many police
unions might have filed grievances or unfair labor practice complaints about the
changes that have been implemented without bargaining. They've chosen not to do
that. n333



    She concluded, "It's not as simple as the labor union being the problem,
tempting as that idea is, and true as it may have been in the past." n334 And
when, in 2014, rank-and-file officers from the North Precinct attempted to
derail the new use of force policy adopted by the police department by filing a
lawsuit, SPOG President Smith publically voiced his disapproval and the union
did not join the lawsuit. n335

   The relationship between the CPC and the police union has been described as
"among the healthiest between any two parties in the [reform] process." n336
Smith notes that the CPC treats the SPOG representative with respect and stated
that while SPOG and the CPC do not agree on everything, at least they "can talk
to each other." n337 He further shared that he has "a really good relationship
with [CPC co-chair] Lisa [Daugaard]." n338 The relationship is such that when
the federal district court judge in charge of overseeing the consent decree
suggested that "any new appeal process for police discipline cases created
through ongoing collective bargaining negotiations must get approval from the
court," the CPC filed an amicus brief supporting SPOG's resistance to this
suggestion. n339 Ironically, observers note that most of the tension "has been
between the CPC and other parties to the consent decree, namely the Mayor's
Office and the independent monitor team." n340

   Unfortunately, the rosy situation in Seattle may have come to an end. In
early June 2016, SPOG President Ron Smith resigned after a scandal involving a
controversial Facebook post in which he blamed the Dallas police officer
shootings on what he termed the "minority movement." n341 He denies that he was
referring to the Black Lives  [*766]  Matter movement, claiming instead that he
was referring to "the small segment of society which has the propensity for
violence toward law enforcement." n342 However, he resigned because the negative
publicity was pulling attention away from the reform efforts being made in the
City. n343

   In a later interview, however, Smith disclosed that he also resigned because
the Executive Board of the union was going to attempt to force him out because
of his acceptance of police accountability measures in the proposed union
contract and for being too conciliatory to outside reformers and the Police
Chief. n344 He had been described as a "bootlicker" because of his relationship
with the Chief, despite the fact that his collaboration with Chief O'Toole was
crucial to his ability to negotiate improvements to officer working conditions.
n345 While he expected that he could win the fight and stay in office because of
support he had amongst some members of the Executive Board and the
rank-and-file, he did not want the controversy over his Facebook post to
distract from the ongoing reform process. n346 After he resigned, officers voted
823 to 156 to reject the contract. n347 One of the reasons was the inclusion of
civilian review in the proposed agreement. n348

[*767]

   B. Drawing Lessons from Experiences

 One of the most important lessons from the examples above is that while it
might be difficult to convince unions to move away from their core mission to
protect their membership from discipline, their defense of officers does not
necessarily signal a lack of willingness to engage in other reform efforts.
Although reformers often view a union's defense of officers as a hindrance,
sometimes this defense can even facilitate reforms by exposing institutional and
systemic problems. For instance, as discussed in Part I, broken windows
policing, the War on Drugs, and CompStat have together created intense pressures
on rank-and-file officers to increase summonses, arrests, and stops and frisks.
When officers complain or fail to meet their numbers, they might be given
negative performance evaluations, affecting their ability to get promoted.

   This occurred in 2012 when some NYPD officers believed that their negative
performance evaluations were the result of their complaints about their
precinct's quota system. n349 Patrick Lynch, the President of the NYPD's police
union, the PBA, brought attention to these problems when he told newspaper
reporters that these quotas were "a department-wide problem." n350 A New York
Times Magazine article on the persistence of arrest quotas reported that
officers who shared their belief that the emphasis on numbers resulted in
unnecessary arrests feared retribution from the brass. One officer said that the
rank-and-file were "utterly demoralized and critical of the department. But they
don't have a voice ... . If they speak out, they get crushed." n351

   In 2005, the PBA challenged "the department's obsession with numbers" in a
case involving an officer employed by the seventy-fifth precinct who received a
negative evaluation allegedly based on his failure to meet the unofficial quota.
n352 Years later, on May 7, 2012, the PBA took out a newspaper ad attacking the
quotas which read: "Don't blame the cop ... . Blame NYPD management for pressure
to write summonses and the pressure to convict motorists." n353 The ad claimed
the Department punished officers who did not write enough tickets. n354
Similarly, in New Jersey, the union opposed orders from police  [*768]
management to meet quotas, which union president Stewart claims created pressure
on officers "to conduct baseless stops and strained relations with community
members." n355

   Additionally, a union's defense of officers can also facilitate structural
reforms. For instance, NYPD officers who spoke out against the Department's
controversial stop and frisk practices did so anonymously because they feared
retaliation and punishment. n356 One officer said that "punishments for falling
short of quotas ranged from losing a longtime partner, low evaluation scores,
retraining and denial of days off or overtime requests." n357 Other officers
shared similar stories. n358 Although it is unclear whether the union played any
role in protecting these officers' right to speak out against prevailing
management practices, doing so would certainly fall within the union's function.

   Another lesson from the examples is the importance of giving voice to
rank-and-file officers in reform efforts. However, much of the policing
literature observes that most reform efforts take a top-down approach. Police
chiefs, politicians, and reformers often complain that the union and the
collective bargaining agreement are obstacles to reform, and many police
reformers have long accepted the idea that reform can only be accomplished
through a top-down process. n359

   The wariness of some reformers about the willingness of police unions to
embrace reform can be traced to the political activism of  [*769]  unions during
the late 1960s, n360 when unions opposed citizen review boards and
reform-oriented chiefs, n361 in addition to pursuing improvements in wages,
benefits, and seniority. n362 Police activism during this time often took the
form of "rabid, knee-jerk opposition to civilian oversight, active participation
in far right-wing organizations, vigilante attacks on black activists, [and]
organized brutality against political protesters." n363 Today, statements and
actions by police unions and rank-and-file officers continue to lend support to
the view that police rank-and-file share a monolithic occupational mindset and
subculture of paranoia, insularity, and intolerance. n364

   It is also undoubtedly true that the crime-fighting ideology of
professionalism in policing and the law-and-order rhetoric of the political
right had a long-term impact on police officers and their unions, even though
most police union leaders now are in the middle of the political spectrum. n365
Additionally, some resistance to reforms can be explained by rank-and-file
opposition to policies that require them to retreat from their traditional,
aggressive crime-control orientation. This should not be surprising, however,
because many likely joined the police department relying upon the type of
policing that is currently  [*770]  in vogue and taught in most police academies
and in their departments. Thus, changes to policing tactics might seem like a
bait-and-switch, especially when measures of officer success have not kept pace
with changes in policing tactics such as community policing.

   However, attributing resistance solely to rank-and-file intransigence ignores
how the typical top-down approach to reforms can also predictably lead to
resistance. Resistance often stems from people's "opposition to, or frustration
with, enactments of power." n366 Research from the study of power reveals that
certain exercises of authority can breed deep resentment among lower-level
employees, resulting in resistance to employer-mandated policies and procedures.
One form of power that predictably produces frustration is failing to provide
employees with a voice in decisionmaking. n367 Voice is important because it
expresses to workers that their views are significant enough to be considered.
n368 Failing to give employees' voice, or providing them with illusory voice,
n369 not only serves as a sign of their low status, but also deprives them of
interactions with power holders that can favorably influence their attitudes.
n370

   These studies of the significance of voice in the workplace correspond to
studies of police culture and suggest the importance of police union involvement
in police reform. Studies of the successes and failures of community policing
models have found that proper training of officers and a participatory
management style are correlated with more positive officer attitudes about
community policing. n371 For instance:



    Street officers in Chicago who feel well trained in COP [community-oriented
policing] hold much more positive attitudes about their jobs than officers who
do not feel well  [*771]  trained; they are also more optimistic about the
impact of COP on crime if they feel a part of the decision-making process.
Agencies that imposed community policing and maintained a top-down, paramilitary
decision-making style tended to meet with strong officer resistance. n372



    Moreover, it is likely that the insights and creativity of rank-and-file
officers can revolutionize policing. "Line personnel are a powerful and
important resource ... to improve policing [and] the relationship between police
and citizens." n373 Another example from Seattle demonstrates this point. In
October of 2011, Seattle unveiled an ambitious and unique four-year pilot
program to address the major problem of open-air drug markets in the downtown
Seattle corridor. n374 The Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion ("LEAD") program
is a pre-booking program that gives police officers the discretion to divert
individuals engaged in low-level drug and prostitution crimes to community-based
services instead of jail and prosecution. n375 The program was the first of its
kind in the country and resulted from a successful collaboration between
unlikely partners including the public defender's office, the prosecutor's
office, community groups, nonprofit organizations such as the ACLU, and top
command from the SPD. n376

   Like many other reform efforts that seek to change street-level policing
practices, LEAD policymakers followed a top-down approach. They sought input
from high-level police officials, social scientists, advocates, and community
leaders. n377 Although patrol officers from one precinct of the SPD were given
significant responsibility for  [*772]  making the program work, their input was
never sought. n378 Rather, the reformers used the ubiquitous top-down approach
and worked only with top command in developing the policy. n379

   The new program was poised to be a huge success. n380 Command-level officers
within the police department fully supported the program. n381 As a result, they
instituted new rules and policies for patrol officers to follow. n382 There was
just one problem. Despite the absence of overt resistance to the program from
the rank-and-file officers responsible for its implementation, there was
significant opposition behind the scenes. n383 In fact, not only did patrol
officers resent the program, but middle managers within the department were also
suspicious. n384 The unique and groundbreaking cooperation between top command
and outside agencies and experts may have aggravated rank-and-file resentments.
As two policing scholars note, rank-and-file officers do "not appreciate being
told what to do by outsiders, especially outsiders whom they perceive as
unacquainted, or at least out of touch, with the daily demands of their job."
n385 Consequently, while these officers did not publicly voice their disapproval
of LEAD, some quietly and covertly failed to implement it. n386 This hidden
resistance would not have been discovered but for the fact that the program's
evaluation process included focus groups with middle management. n387

   It is unsurprising that the rank-and-file were suspicious of the policy.
Although top command was heavily involved in working out its  [*773]  final
details, this was unlikely to alleviate rank-and-file concerns. n388
Furthermore, failing to give them any voice likely fueled existing resentments
because it communicated to them just how unimportant their views were and just
how low their status was within the department. To make matters worse, they were
one of the only groups excluded from policymaking that would actually be
affected by the policy. Members of the community and other organizations
throughout the City gave their input. n389 Finally, because the rank-and-file
had no contact with the civilian reformers, they had no opportunity to develop a
different opinion about their motives. n390

   Rank-and-file resistance to LEAD was not open and obvious. There was no
public position taken by the union against the policy and the officers did not
publicly voice their disapproval. Rather, they engaged in what political
scientist James Scott refers to as "everyday resistance": acts of resistance
that are meant to frustrate or defeat formal dictates in ways that are designed
not to be discernible. n391 Their resistance was only discovered because LEAD's
evaluation process called for the creation of focus groups made up of sergeants
from the department. n392 During discussions, the sergeants not only disclosed
their own reservations about the policy, but they also shared the resentments of
the rank-and-file. n393 These resentments and mistrust had led the rank-and-file
to quietly and covertly undermine the policy on the street. n394

   In response, the group began to work closely with the sergeants and some
rank-and-file officers to determine what the problems were  [*774]  and how to
best address them. n395 This process entailed giving these groups a voice and
the ability to make changes to LEAD in response to their concerns. While the
officers were initially skeptical about whether the group was actually
interested in obtaining their input, they slowly came around. n396

   Today, not only has the program improved, n397 but the relationships of trust
that were formed between members of the police department and reformers have
fostered additional gains in other areas. Importantly, it is not that all
rank-and-file officers bought into the program, but, rather, that while some
still questioned the substance of the policy, they also worked towards improving
its efficacy. n398 Giving genuine voice to officers and treating them with
respect affected their attitudes and behaviors towards LEAD. n399 This occurred
even though many continue to disagree with the substance of the policy. n400
Being included in the process, rather than being marginalized, and having
quality interpersonal interactions with reformers helped mitigate feelings of
distrust and skepticism from the lower ranks. n401 According to one of the
reformers who founded LEAD, the program is having an important and positive
impact in the community due to innovations from rank-and-file police officers
and sergeants. n402

   In sum, the Seattle experience provides some evidence that rank-and-file
officers can play a significant role in reform-oriented policymaking. Although
this role did not involve the union per se, the union also did not file
grievances and other collective bargaining challenges that they could have
brought. Furthermore, the relationships of trust that developed between some
members of the rank-and-file and the outside reformers have facilitated other
reform efforts. With this type of close contact, reformers can gain a better
understanding of the major concerns of the rank-and-file and the union and
attempt to address them.

    [*775]  Giving the rank-and-file a voice in implementing reforms can also
facilitate more positive relationships between the rank-and-file and police
management. The more contact management has with the rank-and-file, the less
likely union leadership can successfully paint a falsely negative picture of
management to ensure that rank-and-file officers continue to join the union,
increasing the power, influence, and budget of union leadership.

   Policymakers cannot afford to disregard the dynamics of power within police
departments for at least two reasons. First, the way that power is exercised
within departments can influence whether rank-and-file officers view reforms as
legitimate and entitled to deference, or whether they attempt to undermine them
through acts of resistance. Policymakers should recognize that when they work
solely with the top command levels of police departments, they might
unintentionally exacerbate rank-and-file frustrations with existing power
arrangements, leading to resistance to any new policies that might be enacted.
n403 Thus, although reformers may believe they have achieved success because
police management has enacted new policies and procedures in response to their
concerns, their failure to engage the rank-and-file may ultimately doom their
efforts.

   Second, the dynamics of power also reveal that resistance may occur without
the knowledge of police management or outside policymakers. Hidden acts of
resistance in the face of power are ubiquitous because open opposition by
subordinate groups often has adverse consequences, especially in the workplace.
n404 For instance, an employee who candidly expresses her displeasure and
disagreement with rules and policies directly to her supervisor may
significantly reduce her opportunities for promotion or other discretionary
employment benefits. Because street officers operate primarily out of sight of
management, they have numerous opportunities to engage in covert resistance to
reform-oriented policies. When resistance is subtle rather than overt,
management and reformers may be unaware that the new policy is not being
implemented. n405

   What the analysis thus far has shown is that police unions have strong
incentives to resist policies imposed without their involvement in policy
development, but also that when they are involved in policy development and when
the reforms are not simply focused on harsher and swifter punishment of
officers, police unions have supported  [*776]  them. The question to which this
Article: now turn is whether it is feasible to use the levers of labor law to
increase the incentives for departments and unions to collaborate in developing
and implementing reforms.

   IV. Changing Police Unions

 One would search in vain for any account of the problems with policing or the
avenues for reform that doesn't place substantial emphasis on changing
rank-and-file police culture and the supervision and training of the
rank-and-file. As the DOJ concluded in its August 2016 Report on the Baltimore
Police Department ("BPD"), "the constitutional violations described in [the]
findings result in part from critical deficiencies in the BPD's systems to
train, equip, supervise, and hold officers accountable." n406 DOJ found that,
among other things, the BPD does not "collect and analyze reliable data" to
allow early interventions to deal with problematic officer conduct; does not
consistently accept, investigate, or respond to complaints of even serious
misconduct; and "many officers are reluctant to report misconduct for fear that
doing so is fruitless and may provoke retaliation." n407 The set of best
practices promulgated by the International Association of Chiefs of Police,
along with empirical research on police, agree that rank-and-file officers
should be involved in the development of policies, and in-depth analyses of
problematic police departments often find that the rank-and-file are not
involved in policymaking and resist the implementation of reforms. n408 Although
scholars and commentators urge greater public involvement and transparency, more
will be required than just public involvement and transparency to get police
culture to change. n409 The question this Article: answers is whether  [*777]
changing certain institutional structures of employee representation, including
police unions, will promote rank-and-file support for measures that would
improve community policing, transparency, and accountability. In short: yes.

   Principles of labor law should be used to create leverage within police
departments for officers and supervisors who support reform. In particular,
organizations of officers other than the majority union should be empowered to
meet and confer with department leaders over the formulation and implementation
of policies relating to community policing, data collection and analysis, and
transparency. Section A outlines the appropriate incursions on the labor law
principle of exclusive representation. Section B then addresses the specifics of
the proposal. This Part concludes by addressing some potential questions.

   A. Why Empower New Labor Organizations in Police Departments?

 The literature on policing, the investigations of particular police
departments, and the news coverage of policing since Ferguson suggest that
officers throughout the hierarchy in many police departments are receptive to
reform and willing to report and to try to prevent unconstitutional conduct.
n410 But most accounts of supporters of reform either make no mention of the
police union or suggest that the union was at best indifferent to the problems
and at worst hostile to reform efforts and whistleblowers. n411 For example, the
NYPD officer profiled in the February 2016 New York Times Magazine for his
efforts to challenge the persistence of racial inequities in police-citizen
encounters described being retaliated against and seeking support not from the
police union but from an association of Black NYPD officers and joining a class
action suit. n412 Another NYPD officer, Adrian Schoolcraft, was retaliated
against by management when he exposed the crime data manipulation occurring due
to the Department's unofficial quota policy, and the PBA did nothing to protect
him. n413 In the  [*778]  LAPD, an association of Black officers supports Black
Lives Matter while the union does not. n414 The DOJ report on the BPD states
that investigators met with leadership of the Baltimore City Lodge No. 3 of the
FOP, which represents all sworn BPD officers, and repeatedly cites a 2012 FOP
report critical of certain aspects of BPD. The DOJ report notes a few provisions
of the union contract that make officer discipline more difficult but says
relatively little about how the FOP could be either an obstacle to or an agent
of reform. n415 The DOJ report on the Chicago Police Department states its
investigators met with representatives of the unions for rank-and-file,
sergeants, lieutenants, and captains, and the report notes that although there
are obstacles to accountability in the union contracts, there are also ways to
override these contractual impediments that the City rarely invokes. n416 If the
reformers at the top of a police department had institutionalized connections to
reform supporters at the bottom of the hierarchy, things might change.

   In theory, unions could facilitate accountability. By protecting
rank-and-file officers from unfair decisions, unions could enable these officers
to exercise discretion and judgment, assure fairness in punishing mistakes, and
enable whistleblowing. Unions might prevent scapegoating a single hapless
officer when blame for mistreatment of citizens belongs elsewhere. They could
also work to counter management's insistence on dangerous policies, such as the
case of NYPD Officer Peter Liang, who shot an unarmed Black youth in a stairwell
while on duty in accordance with a policy of "training" rookie officers by
placing them in extremely dangerous situations, which had previously been
identified by Commissioner Bratton "as a ticking time bomb." n417 Yet the
examples above and in Part II suggest that unions do not always play this role.

   Changing demographics of large urban police forces may provide a path forward
to create such institutionalized connections among reformers throughout the
hierarchy. As police departments have become  [*779]  more diverse,
identity-based groups representing officers have gained members and influence.
Recent work shows that "[a] diverse police force mitigates group threat and
thereby reduces the number of officer-involved killings." n418 The diversity of
the police force is thought to reduce excessive force through four processes:
(1) it increases legitimacy of the police among minority communities; (2) it
increases the number of officers who may be more compassionate toward minority
communities; (3) it increases opportunities for contact between police and
citizens; and, perhaps most important, (4) it weakens solidarity within the
police community when confronted with threats. n419 Thus, although data remain
unclear on whether the representation of African Americans in the police
directly influences the number of officer-involved killings of African
Americans, it is linked with "various factors associated with group threat and
thereby eases the tensions between the police and African-American communities."
n420

   A diverse workforce is less likely to have a monolithic attitude toward
issues, but it is necessary to have a mechanism to translate the diversity of
perspectives into policymaking and implementation. That institutional mechanism
could be a diversity of labor organizations. Such organizations already exist in
many large departments. The next step is to make them more effective in becoming
a voice for reform. That process may already be happening, as some mainstream
police unions are staving off the threat to their dominance as the police labor
representative by building their own bridges to civilian groups, both inside and
outside the labor movement. n421

   A second and related way the institutionalization of alternative labor
organizations might transform police departments is by combatting the proven
tendency of police unions toward oligarchy. The solidarity that is essential for
any union to function is especially powerful in a workforce in which officers
can endanger each other's safety by refusing to respond to a call for backup.
The duty of fair representation, along with union constitutions and bylaws
requiring regular democratic  [*780]  elections of leadership, are supposed to
temper the tendency toward oligarchy and to make the union leadership responsive
to the disparate views of the members. n422 Yet, as labor scholars have long
observed, oligarchy remains a significant issue for many unions, and police
unions are no exception. n423 But the problem is not simply oligarchy, in the
sense of control of the union by a few, but also that union leadership in many
cities seems unresponsive to the segment of the rank-and-file who favor greater
engagement with minority communities especially. For example, as discussed
above, in a number of circumstances union leadership's embrace of reform
elicited a threat from a segment of the membership to vote the reformers out of
union office, as happened in Seattle. n424 A Boston Police Department veteran
noted that "union leaders who might seek a collaborative role with management in
facilitating reform would not be re-elected to office." n425 Alternatively,
progressive forces within police departments have struggled with more regressive
union leadership. NYPD officers attempted to oust PBA President Lynch after his
hostile comments following the killings of Eric Garner and others, but they were
unsuccessful. n426 Empowering a minority union might either goad the majority
union into supporting reform or provide an alternate channel for reform-oriented
officers to meet and confer with management about reform with legal protection
from retaliation for doing so.

   Third, minority unionism might address the major criticisms of public
employee unions. One criticism is that they are not responsive to the views of
the full range of public employees and they promote  [*781]  bad governance.
n427 Another is that public employees and governments agree to terms that are
not in the public interest because taxpayers are not represented in bargaining
and public employee unions are a special interest with disproportionate
influence in the political process; unions are able to get legislators and
executive branch officials elected and to lobby for legislation (e.g., the
construction of more prisons or harsher criminal sentences) that increase
employment. Empirical support for and modeling that attempts to prove this
argument exist, but the evidence is mixed. n428

   These criticisms were explored in a classic work written early in the
development of public sector unions, using the example of police. Clyde Summers,
a thoughtful scholar of labor law and a proponent of the benefits of
unionization, observed that government employee collective bargaining is a
political policymaking process and that the bargaining process and the subjects
over which public employees bargain should be regulated by law to produce a
desirable political framework in which to make policy decisions. n429 Discussing
police disciplinary procedures, Summers postulated that a police union "probably
represents the consensus of" officers in negotiating to foreclose public review
of discipline. n430 He suggested that a public review board perhaps ought not be
subject to bargaining, because there would not be a fair airing of all sides of
the issue. n431 A public review board, he said, is unlikely to be opposed by
"those interested in more police protection," or by "the chief of police and the
police commissioners who sit on the employer's side of the bargaining table,"
and in bargaining between the union and the brass, no one represents the
interests of "those who fear that policemen will act abusively or unlawfully and
that their superiors will not take appropriate disciplinary action." n432
[*782]  Thus, he concluded, collective bargaining "does not provide an
appropriate political process for full discussion of the issue or for weighing
and reconciling the competing interests." n433 The labor law doctrinal response
to the Summers argument would be to declare that citizen review boards are not a
permissible subject of bargaining so that neither management nor the union could
negotiate away the public's right to review some police policies.

   Yet, for the reasons given above and in the literature on other forms of
institutional reform, limiting the power of a police union by simply taking some
issues off the negotiating table is not a solution to the problem of police
misconduct. It is essential to marshal the support of the labor force to
implement policy, and the more discretion, skill, and expertise is required for
the work, the more important it is to ensure that police officers at the bottom
of the organization are given an opportunity to voice their ideas and concerns.
Moreover, the evidence from states that prohibit public employee bargaining does
not suggest that having no union produces less police abuse. n434

   The questions of accountability of police officers to the public and police
union leadership to the members exist even where there is no institutionalized
collective bargaining, as in North Carolina. n435 In North Carolina, which
prohibits governments from collectively bargaining with organizations
representing public employees, the FOP, which claims 6,000 members among city
police departments statewide, decided to endorse the Republican candidate for
governor because the Democratic candidate, who was the North Carolina Attorney
General, brought criminal charges against a Charlotte-Mecklenburg police officer
who shot an unarmed Black man in 2013. n436 The absence  [*783]  of
institutionalized negotiating relationships in North Carolina means that the
decision about whom the FOP will endorse is perhaps one of the most important
things that the FOP decides. There is no legal obstacle to police officers
forming other groups to represent a different point of view and collect
contributions from their members to spend on political activity. But the absence
of such a tradition, and the absence of institutional support for such
organizations in the states that do allow public employee bargaining, give the
FOP the practical ability to "speak for" all North Carolina police officers in
the way news organizations cover the event. What if there were an alternative
organization that could rally the members and engage in discussions with
management over an alternative point of view? n437 To create such an
institutional mechanism without producing a cacophony of voices and chaos in
negotiations would require some mechanism to cause organizations to merge or
form coalitions in order to match the leverage a long-established police union
can exert. How that can be done is described below.

   B. A Form of Members-Only Bargaining

 One old criticism of unions that has gained recent support, especially among
conservatives and libertarians, asserts that collective bargaining by a union
chosen by the majority violates the rights of the minority who disagree with the
union's position. n438 This objection to unions has particular salience in the
case of police unions, especially in departments where officers disagree about
how to police minority communities and whether arrests for certain relatively
minor offenses serve the public interest. While, for the moment, public employee
unions chosen by the majority remain the exclusive representative of all
employees in the bargaining unit, the recent litigation and legislative  [*784]
efforts to dramatically curtail bargaining rights of government workers have
invited consideration of alternative models. n439

   One model is members-only union representation with some kind of proportional
representation rule. This type of system existed for some government employees
prior to the development of modern public sector labor law. California, for
example, had a proportional representation system for some public employees from
1961, when it enacted its first public sector labor law statute, to 1976, when
it adopted new public sector labor statutes providing for exclusive
representation. n440 The Winton Act, n441 as the old statute was known, did not
allow public employers to recognize an exclusive bargaining representative
chosen by the majority. n442 Instead, employee councils consisting of
representatives from the gamut of employee organizations were authorized to meet
with employers. n443 These councils were ostensibly to save time for government
agencies, allowing them to hear all opinions at once. n444 The council included
representatives from employees in the form of organization representatives or
even individuals. n445 The Act permitted the majority-employee organization to
articulate the official position of the employees, but provided a forum for
other minority organization representatives and individuals to express points of
view. n446

   The suggestions gleaned from these council meetings were handled by the
employer agency (i.e., the school board, because the Winton Act applied to
teachers). n447 The employer had the legal right  [*785]  under the Winton Act
to make the final decision on all matters. n448 The Act recommended that
employers incorporate agreed-upon items into written resolutions, regulations,
or policies, but these directives were implemented in various ways across the
state, and council procedures differed from one city, county, or school district
to another. n449

   This proportional representation system was replaced in California in 1976,
and in other states by the early 1970s, for a variety of good reasons. It was
far from ideal. It was expensive and cumbersome. It did not provide an organized
system for shared decisionmaking between government employees and public
administrators because decisionmaking authority was left in the hands of the
government agency. n450 It instead generated conflict among different groups of
employees and it was an obstacle to uniform policies across governmental units.
n451

   Majority rule through exclusive representation, in contrast, can be more
efficient as a system of governance, which is why it is the rule in every
democracy. But, sticking with political analogies, many parliamentary
democracies have governance systems that involve multiple parties that form
coalitions to create a majority, and that might be a pattern worth considering
for police unions if the concern is that union leadership are systematically
excluding voices within the rank-and-file.

   A variety of issues would need to be addressed, depending on how radical a
change in the existing system of representation a state chose to adopt. If
officers chose not to belong to the existing union, in the twenty-two states
that allow employers and unions to negotiate contracts requiring payment of
agency fees to a recognized labor organization, n452 would employees be
obligated to pay an agency fee to the majority union or could they instead pay
fees to their own? Would the majority union retain the duty of fair
representation to all represented employees or only some duty to its members?
n453 Would the  [*786]  same collective bargaining agreement apply to all
officers or only to the members?

   For the moment, a modest change is the best course of action because it is
the only one that might conceivably be adopted (as legislative change is likely
necessary), because it might allow beneficial changes without destroying the
police unions that function well, and because incremental changes might allow
governments to assess the impact and unintended consequences and make
corrections before completely upending existing bargaining agreements and
personnel practices. To prevent undue disruption to existing unions and
bargaining relationships, the same principles of dues and fees as exist under
current law would apply, as would the duty of fair representation and all the
labor law that turns on the duty of fair representation. All that would change
is the department would have the duty to meet and confer with a minority union
provided it demonstrated a minimum level of support - say, membership of twenty
percent or more of the officers in the department. The minimum threshold of
support would, ideally, minimize the burden on police departments to meet and
confer with too many groups and would provide incentives for groups of employees
to band together to make their voices heard.

   The scope of that duty to meet and confer would extend to any topic relating
to conditions of police employment other than terms in the existing contract. In
labor law terms, the duty to confer would cover matters of policy that are not
mandatory subjects of bargaining under existing law. The purposes of this limit
are several. It would theoretically reduce majority union opposition to the
proposal. It would avoid destabilizing existing bargaining agreements and the
department's and government's budget expectations resting on them. It would
prevent departments from cutting officer pay and benefits by trading off
responsiveness to minority unions about policing practices and community
relations for economic and job protections enjoyed by all officers. The purpose
of this limited duty to confer is to create an institutional mechanism for
police officers to be involved in policymaking and problem solving. n454 That is
why the scope of the new  [*787]  duty omits the wages and working conditions as
to which public sector labor law currently imposes a duty to bargain. But it is
not intended to weaken the economic and disciplinary protections for which
police unions have bargained.

   The proposal resembles some that have been made for the reform of teaching,
another area of public sector employment with high union density and substantial
controversy about whether unionization serves the interests of the government
employees and the public. n455 It also more generally resembles proposals to
create institutions of labor-management cooperation that have been made many
times for different industries in that it provides a framework for collective
discussion of issues of mutual concern outside the context of union-management
negotiations over wages and working conditions. n456 It echoes criticisms of
labor law scholars, including Martin Malin and Joseph Slater, concerning the
scope of the duty to meet and confer in the public sector. n457 According to
Professor Malin, there is a lot of evidence that when workers, through their
unions, are given a voice in areas where they have no right to bargain, the
union's role is transformed and better policies result. For example, when school
boards unilaterally impose performance standards, it is not a surprise that
unions do what they can to protect teachers from adverse actions based on
failing to meet those standards. When school boards opt instead to work with the
union to develop those standards and use peer review to implement them, the
unions become the protectors of the standards rather  [*788]  than knee-jerk
opponents. Union involvement in teacher peer review leads to greater levels of
attrition among poor performers than traditional methods of principal
observation and discipline or dismissal for failure to meet the standards. n458

   A similar phenomenon occurred in the 1990s, when President Clinton by
Executive Order created partnership councils and thereby spurred the creation of
a very successful partnership between the Customs Service n459 and the National
Treasury Employees Union that represented customs agents. n460 Data showed a
substantial improvement in job performance, even by metrics such as increased
drug and currency seizures. n461 Similar results were seen in Oakland, when the
police department developed a peer review system for reviewing officer uses of
force. n462 As indicated above, during the pendency of the project the
department experienced a reduction in officer use of force. n463

   This proposal also incorporates suggestions that labor law scholars have made
to incorporate identity-based groups into unionized workplaces as a way of
ensuring that the majority union does not systematically overlook the interests
of minorities. n464 Officers could belong both to the minority union and to the
majority union so that they would not have to give up the benefits of majority
union membership, including the ability to vote on leadership and contract
ratification  [*789]  and the right to receive insurance and legal
representation paid for by union dues. Officers also could gain the benefits of
membership in the minority union, principally the ability to have a voice in the
minority union's governance and priority-setting policies.

   This proposal solves many of the unique problems associated with police
unions in the quest for reform. Police unions have been isolated from the rest
of the labor movement in many ways, but particularly in their disconnectedness
from the social movement unionism principles and practices that have
reinvigorated many other unions. A police minority group that shares a
self-interest with Black Lives Matter or Moral Mondays is ideally situated to
start trying to transform the culture of the police department and the police
union. A minority union might find allies among the activists of Black Lives
Matter and other groups, which might empower the minority union to stand up to
what might be considerable pressure from the police union. That is a type of
protection for whistleblowing that simply cannot be legislated or enforced by
contract. And it might create momentum that would attract quiescent dissenters
from among the rank-and-file to abandon their reflexive support for the union
and its defense of miscreant officers. n465

   C. Will This Version of Members-Only Unionism Weaken Public Sector Unions?
And Is That a Bad Thing?

 There are certain large and small objections to any proposal to adopt any form
of members-only bargaining, even one as minor as this. We address two clusters
of the most important objections below.

   One major concern is that the proposal does too little. It is not clear that
adopting this limited duty to meet and confer with minority organizations will
change very much. Police officers have shown themselves to be quite loyal to
their unions. n466 This proposal leaves the majority union in charge of the
economic contract terms and the disciplinary system, at least in the
jurisdictions where the disciplinary system is in the contract rather than
written into statute. n467 These are  [*790]  the two top priorities for police,
n468 and the disciplinary system is the biggest concern of police reformers.
n469 Moreover, many protections are written into statutes, and no system of
union representation will change that unless the majority union is weakened to
the point that it cannot block legislative change. n470 But the modesty of this
proposal should be seen as a feature rather than a bug, at least to those who
favor some reform but fear that radical change is either politically impossible
or would wreak havoc on public employee labor relations and thereby do more harm
than good. As a modest development, it would not change too much too fast, which
might allow for innovation in the fertile pockets of progressive police activism
that do exist without destabilizing existing bargaining relationships in
departments that are not already dysfunctional.

   A second major concern is that the minority union would be easily undermined.
Given the radioactive nature of some of the issues the minority union might wish
to discuss with management - e.g., civilian review boards, the officers'
practice of "huddling" before making reports on violence, racial disparities in
arrests for minor infractions n471 - a minority union would face considerable
pressure from the majority union and its members unlike those faced by other
caucuses within unionized workplaces. In some low-wage workers' unions, for
example, few members of the union show up at meetings (because union meetings
take free time that many workers juggling jobs and family do not have) and many
probably do not care much about non-core contractual issues. n472 But one can
imagine police having intense interest in  [*791]  these non-core contractual
issues. Once minority unions have real power, unlike the minority caucuses now,
it is easy to imagine a police minority union being quickly co-opted or
sabotaged by internal union confederates. Minority unions would, under this
proposal, have the right and responsibility to discuss contentious issues, like
use of force, statistical measures of police productivity, and other policing
tactics that have become extremely divisive. One could imagine officers who are
hostile to reform having intense interest in preventing the minority union from
persuading management to make any significant changes. Officers opposed to
reform might sign up en masse to join the minority union precisely to take it
over and kill it. Or minority union members might face intense pressure to
defect to the majority union so that the minority union would dissolve.

   There are ways to design a minority union system to address these concerns.
Perhaps minority union membership could be confidential, leaving the job of
physically meeting and conferring with the brass to the most courageous few who
felt they could publicly stand the pressure. Or the minority union might rely on
the labor law principles that have allowed unions to fire stewards when they
believe the steward has become ideologically opposed to the union. n473 Public
sector labor law in most jurisdictions already protects union activists from
retaliation or harassment, n474 and such protection would need to be extended to
supporters of the minority union as well as the majority union.

   To the extent that a system of representation gained traction, it could
produce the kind of chaos and cacophony that led to criticisms of the
proportional representation system in California before 1976. n475 It could lead
to expensive and slow discussions rather than any real change in policy.
Management could play the two unions off against each other, thus weakening
both. Those concerns could be ameliorated by careful design. The system could be
limited to just one majority and one minority union.

   Moreover, to the extent that the change gave a minority union power to
negotiate any kind of binding agreement on any terms currently subject to the
duty to bargain with the exclusive representative, some complex problems would
arise. Courts or public employee relations  [*792]  boards would have to decide
how to recalibrate the mandatory subjects of bargaining to enable participation
of the minority union. Significantly, they would have to decide whether
discipline remains a mandatory subject of bargaining, because so much of the
controversy over police violence focuses on the appropriate disciplinary
process. If it is, they would have to determine how to allow the minority union
to play a role in negotiation over the disciplinary system. If the minority
union were empowered to be at the bargaining table over design of the
disciplinary system, then questions would arise over how to involve the minority
union in the interest arbitration or fact-finding process that often resolves
bargaining disputes over mandatory subjects of bargaining.

   D. The Benefits of the Proposal Outweigh the Risks

 The advantage this proposal has over most others being offered is that this one
has the possibility of garnering support from some rank-and-file police officers
who are dissatisfied with their union but see a wholesale assault on police
unionism as worse than the status quo. Of course, if even the mildest version of
this proposal were offered as legislation, it may be impossible to enact or
implement, precisely to the extent it would weaken extant unions. In 2011, when
Wisconsin eliminated bargaining rights for most public sector employees, it did
not eliminate such rights for public safety employees. n476 Ohio, in contrast,
tried to eliminate bargaining for every public employee and the voters repealed
the law by referendum. n477 Both of these are reminders of the power of public
safety unions even in climates that have a strong antiunion strain.

   Advocates of the benefits of police unions to police reform in the 1960s
insisted that police unions could train officers in the values of democracy and
could remedy the alienated and repressive mentality of the police by "involving
as many policemen as possible in decision making on all aspects of the
department's job." n478 Creating an institutional mechanism that gives space for
minority unions to voice their concerns would create incentives for existing
unions to account for  [*793]  these opposing views. This might facilitate the
development of the values of "trust, cooperation, communication, ... leadership,
... [and] respect." n479 Working through inevitable disagreements would provide
opportunities for officers to learn these important values. n480 Officers might
gain maturity, patience, and tolerance for different points of view that can
translate into better relationships and engagements with the communities they
serve. n481 Additionally, deliberating through disputes and coming to a
successful resolution will involve creativity and problem solving; skills that
are consonant with abilities they will have to develop to successfully engage in
community policing. n482

   The reasons for encouraging a multitude of voices in reform-oriented
policymaking is not simply to increase buy-in and reduce resistance. Rather,
their contributions can help make the reforms themselves more effective. n483
There are two reasons for this. First, policymakers both within and outside the
department often believe that their expertise makes them better equipped than
the rank-and-file to determine what reforms are necessary and how best to bring
them to fruition. They may be completely unaware of their own limitations and
information gaps. This "fallacy of expertise" n484 causes policymakers to
overlook the benefits of obtaining input from the individuals who will be tasked
with executing their vision. n485

    [*794]  However, as previously discussed, rank-and-file officers will have
insights to share based upon their day-to-day engagement in street policing.
Involving top command in policymaking is not an adequate substitute for the
expertise and knowledge of the rank-and-file because high-level police managers
might have lost touch with changed circumstances on the street. Furthermore, top
command officers may be disconnected from the actual experiences of officers on
the street and thus may be unaware of the challenges posed by the reform to
street officers' daily work. It would be more efficient to identify these issues
prior to implementation rather than after policies and procedures have been
changed.

   The second reason to create mechanisms to ensure that a multitude of voices
are heard is that involvement of the rank-and-file in decisionmaking can help
mitigate inevitable misunderstandings and miscommunications that occur when new
policies are explained to them. The rank-and-file will undoubtedly encounter
unexpected problems during the process of implementation. This "implementation
gap" n486 can occur even if officers are attempting to apply the reform in good
faith. Policymakers cannot anticipate every circumstance that officers will
confront when they attempt to put a new policy into practice. Thus, they cannot
possibly create rules that govern every situation. n487 As a consequence,
officers inevitably interpret and modify policy. n488 This process of
interpretation can have both unforeseen and unintended consequences not
contemplated by the reformers. n489 Also, if officers were not involved in
conceiving the policy, they may not appreciate its goals and intent. Hence,
their choices and judgments will not be informed by a deep understanding of the
policy's purpose.

   As a result of the implementation gap, policies may not work as reformers
intended, even when the rank-and-file are doing their best to abide by them. If
the rank-and-file are not given a voice, reformers may not find out about the
problems. Furthermore, top command and policymakers may attribute the gap
between theory and practice to  [*795]  rank-and-file obstinacy. n490 In
response, top command may increase rank-and-file surveillance in order to
control their behavior and punish them for transgressions, not realizing that
the problems are due to their own inability to anticipate how the policy would
actually work in practice. n491 Ironically, this increased surveillance and
control can lead to resistance that may not have existed in the first place.
n492

   Thus, the failure to involve the rank-and-file not only deprives the reform
of being more effective, but it may also have the unintended effect of
generating resistance, as reformers attribute the failure of the policy solely
to rank-and-file resistance. Two scholars observe,



    All too often, ... this whole process becomes reiterative. The reforms meet
with police skepticism, the way the police respond to them generates unintended
consequences, the negative consequences then inspire another set of reforms that
again meets with local skepticism, and so on.

   The continuous process of reform soon will reach ... a point where police are
so weary of reform that they become increasingly immovable. Constant reform
undermines morale and breeds ever-greater skepticism about reform. n493

 Engaging the rank-and-file in policymaking could help to avoid some of the
problems caused by the fallacy of expertise and the implementation gap. With
involvement, rank-and-file officers could make reformers aware of the challenges
posed by the policies, both ex ante and ex post. Rank-and-file officers
inevitably make policy on the street through their day-to-day interactions with
the public. n494 Involving the rank-and-file in formal policymaking might
enhance the effectiveness of the reform by improving information flows and
rank-and-file compliance. n495

   This proposal can also help to change the notoriously entrenched culture of
police departments. n496 Research suggests that people often  [*796]  engage in
behaviors that they believe others are also engaged in. n497 In other words,
people imitate those around them. Psychologists refer to this as "social proof."
n498 However, often assumptions about another's beliefs are based on inaccurate
information. n499 One way to overcome mistaken beliefs about what others are
thinking is to make other views salient and public. Minority union
representation will show rank-and-file officers that their potentially more
open-minded and progressive views are shared by others. Additionally, this
minority unionism would give outside reformers the opportunity to understand
that there are officers within the department who support their proposals and
this could lead to the forging of partnerships between police reformers and
officers within the department that can facilitate reforms.

   Moreover, if decisionmakers are truly considering input from the
rank-and-file, it is likely that the policies that are eventually enacted will
incorporate some of their suggestions. Rank-and-file officers have knowledge and
expertise to share given their familiarity with the street. n500 They will have
ideas that policymakers did not consider and they can also highlight
unanticipated problems. Additionally, reformers may be unaware that their ideas
as initially proposed are simply unworkable for a variety of reasons from the
mundane to the insurmountable. n501 Thus, rank-and-file officers can help fill
the gap between theory and practice.

   Mechanisms to improve labor-management cooperation are essential to police
reform. It is misguided to suggest that the solution is simply to make it easier
for departments to fire or discipline officers without changing the way that
management relates to the rank-and-  [*797]  file for at least three reasons.
First, it may be politically impossible to significantly reduce contractual or
statutory protections for officers accused of misconduct. Second, and by far
more important, even if every officer who kills a civilian unjustifiably were
fired promptly and criminally prosecuted, it is an empirical question whether
police violence would decline through the operation of specific or general
deterrence. n502 If some number of unjustified police shootings are the result
of poor training or bad management, one puts a great deal of faith in
enlightened police management to assume that eliminating job protections for
rank-and-file officers will allow management to dramatically alter patrol
officers' behavior to better safeguard the public. Even if police union
contracts and statutory LEOBORs were revised to provide a speedier and more
transparent disciplinary process that would make it easier to terminate the
employment of officers found to have used improper force, still policing
behavior might not change dramatically if police management encourages practices
that lead to excessive force, arrests for minor infractions, or other kinds of
law enforcement strategies that harm minority communities.

   Conclusion

 The prevailing narrative suggests that rank-and-file officers in general, and
police unions in particular, are obstacles to reforms that would make policing
more transparent, accountable, and legitimate to the citizenry. While there is
certainly strong evidence to support this view, this Article: highlights
examples of rank-and-file officers acting individually, and some unions acting
representatively, as key partners in reform efforts that can improve the quality
of policing. The essential question is how to increase the opportunities for
officers to be a positive force for the improvement of police services.

   Discussions of the need for police reform understandably focus on problematic
officers and on unions that appear to be irredeemably opposed to any reform
oriented policies. What is lost in these discussions is the recognition of the
officers who could be partners in reform efforts and who do not have a mechanism
for making their voices heard within the department, especially when the police
union for whatever reason either does not support their views or does not take
their views into account. Minority unionism in police departments  [*798]  gives
these officers a voice by creating an institutional mechanism to ensure that
their views are heard.

   This proposal expands the duty of management to meet and confer with the
police union to include subjects relating to reform. It prevents the minority
union from renegotiating the economic terms and disciplinary system created by
the majority union in the collective bargaining agreement or invoking the
interest arbitration system used to resolve bargaining disputes between the
majority union and the department. Thus, departments and police unions should
support this reform, as it respects their interests. The proposal, moreover, is
built on successful labor-management partnerships that have been used in both
federal and state systems and that demonstrably improved productivity, morale,
and the quality of service provided by government agencies in which these types
of labor-management councils have been implemented.

   Alternative proposals such as increasing public scrutiny of police discipline
and reducing job protections for police officers may not achieve greater
accountability or reduce unwarranted police violence. While it is important to
increase public scrutiny of police actions, doing so will not necessarily
further the goals of police accountability. For instance, civilian members of
panels that review the disciplinary decisions of LAPD Police Chief Beck were
"more likely than officers to oppose the chief's discipline recommendations."
n503 Furthermore, if eliminating job protections for officers would reduce
police violence, then it should be done. However, this proposal addresses the
normative question of what kinds of procedural protections police officers
should have when accused of misconduct. n504 Allowing a diverse set of officers
to participate in reform-oriented policymaking would force the primary union to
account for minority voices, force management to account for a diversity of
views, and help management and rank-and-file officers to develop trust.
Providing them voice and accounting for their input shows them respect, gives
them a sense of ownership, n505  [*799]  and will likely increase their
perceptions of the department's legitimacy. The benefits of experimenting with
giving diverse voices a say in reform-oriented policymaking is well worth the
effort.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
GovernmentsLocal GovernmentsEmployees & OfficialsGovernmentsLocal
GovernmentsPolice PowerLabor & Employment LawCollective Bargaining & Labor
RelationsDiscipline, Layoff & Termination

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Larry Buchanan et al., What Happened in Ferguson?, N.Y. Times: Q&A (Aug.
10, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/08/13/us/ferguson-missouri-town-under-si
ege-af ter-police-shooting.html.





n2.  Joseph Goldstein & Marc Santora, Staten Island Man Died from Chokehold
During Arrest, Autopsy Finds, N.Y. Times (Aug. 1, 2014),
https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/02/nyregion/staten-island-man-died-from-officers
-chokehold-autopsy-finds.html?smid=pl-share.





n3.  Joshua Barajas, Freddie Gray's Death Ruled a Homicide, PBS NewsHour: The
Rundown (May 1, 2015, 1:50 PM),
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/freddie-grays-death-ruled-homicide/.





n4.  Pervaiz Shallwani & Thomas MacMillan, NYPD Officer Pleads Not Guilty in
Shooting Death of Unarmed Man, Wall St. J. (Feb. 11, 2015, 9:10 PM),
http://www.wsj.com/articles/nypd-officer-surrenders-after-indictment-in-death-of
-unarmed-man-1423668909.





n5.  Camila Domonoske & Bill Chappell, Minnesota Governor Calls Traffic Stop
Shooting 'Absolutely Appalling at All Levels,' NPR: The Two-Way (July 7, 2016,
7:19 AM),
http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/07/07/485066807/police-stop-ends-in-
black-mans-death-aftermath-is-livestreamed-online-video.





n6.  Christian Boone, No Charges for Officers Who Shot Woman in Back of Patrol
Car, Atlanta J.-Const. (July 15, 2016, 9:07 PM), http://www.myajc.com/news/crime
-
law/charges-for-officers-who-shot-woman-back-patrol-car/V519PgmXsxe48f9cmhwuqL/.





n7.  Angel Jennings, A Mother Was Fatally Shot 13 Times in Inglewood. But the
Police Watchdog Group Has Barely Even Met, L.A. Times (Oct. 17, 2016, 4:05 AM),
http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-inglewood-police-oversight-20160906-sna
p-story.html.





n8.  Similar criticisms have been leveled at teachers' unions, and for similar
reasons. See generally Daniel M. Rosenthal, Public Sector Collective Bargaining,
Majoritarianism, and Reform, 91 Or. L. Rev. 673 (2013) (describing criticisms of
teachers' unions). We focus on police unions in this Article: , leaving to
others to consider the extent to which our analysis and our proposal might be
appropriate for other public sector employees.





n9.  See Henrick Karoliszyn, Solidarity in Blue, Crime Rep. (Feb. 22, 2016),
http://thecrimereport.org/2016/02/22/solidarity-in-blue/; see also Jacob
Fischler, Police Union Expresses Frustration Over Labor's Response to Ferguson,
Eric Garner, BuzzFeed News (Dec. 10, 2014, 10:50 AM),
https://www.buzzfeed.com/jacobfischler/police-union-expresses-frustration-over-l
a bors-response-to-f?utm term=.np51r4WXq#.ilQlq3d0x.





n10.  Civil Rights Div. & U.S. Attorney's Office N. Dist. of Ill., U.S. Dep't of
Justice, Investigation of the Chicago Police Department 7 (2017),
https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/925846/download [hereinafter DOJ Chi. Rep.].





n11.  Id. at 47.





n12.  Id.





n13.  Civil Rights Div., U.S. Dep't of Justice, Investigation of the Baltimore
City Police Department 3 (2016),
http://civilrights.baltimorecity.gov/sites/default/files/20160810
DOJ%20BPD%20Report-FINAL.pdf [hereinafter DOJ Balt. Rep.].





n14.  See id. at 146, 152-53. Similarly, the DOJ Chicago Report notes that some
of the actions of CPD management, such as failing to provide information about
the criteria for promotions and failing to provide officers with safe and
functional equipment, lower officer morale and foster officer skepticism. See
DOJ Chi. Rep., supra note 10, at 123, 129.





n15.  In 2015, forty-five percent of local government employees were represented
by a union, as compared to less than eight percent of private sector employees.
See Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Dep't of Labor, USDL-16-0158, Union Members
- 2015 tbl.3 (2016), https://www.bls.gov/news.release/archives/union2
01282016.pdf.





n16.  See Daniel DiSalvo, Government Against Itself: Public Union Power and Its
Consequences 4-5 (2015).





n17.  Five Justices expressed concern during a January 2016 oral argument about
the constitutionality of a union security provision in a teachers' union
contract, in part because of the influence that teachers' unions exert in
setting education policy. See Transcript of Oral Argument at 4, 15, 41-42,
45-47, 76, Friedrichs v. Cal. Teachers Ass'n, 136 S. Ct. 1083 (2016) (No.
14-915). After Justice Scalia died, an equally divided Court affirmed the lower
court's dismissal of the suit and, therefore, the law remains unchanged. See
Friedrichs v. Cal. Teachers Ass'n, 136 S. Ct. 1083 (2016) (per curiam); see also
Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Educ., 431 U.S. 209, 227-32 (1977) (affirming that
public unions may participate in policymaking).





n18.  Josh Gerstein, What Trump's Supreme Court Pick Means for the Court,
Politico (Feb. 1, 2017, 5:05 AM),
http://www.politico.com/story/2017/02/trump-supreme-court-gorsuch-234471
("Perhaps the most certain result of putting Gorsuch on the court is an eventual
setback for public employee unions.").





n19.  See Martin H. Malin et al., Public Sector Employment: Cases and Materials
7-20 (3d ed. 2016) (summarizing changes to public sector labor law and gathering
sources evaluating need for changes).





n20.  See, e.g., Stephen Rushin, Police Union Contracts, 66 Duke L.J. 1191, 1239
(2017) (arguing that state labor law poses a significant barrier to police
reform and proposing that the public be given a right to participate in
collective bargaining over police disciplinary procedures); Rachel A. Harmon,
The Problem of Policing, 110 Mich. L. Rev. 761, 799-801 (2012) (arguing that
"collective bargaining rights deter department-wide changes intended to prevent
constitutional violations" and proposing that scholars attend not only to
constitutional law and civil rights laws regulating policing but also to labor
and employment law); Samuel Walker, The Baltimore Police Union Contract and the
Law Enforcement Officers's Bill of Rights: Impediments to Accountability (May
2015) (unpublished report), http://www.aclu-md.org/uploaded
files/0000/0681/walker - baltimore police union contract report.pdf (arguing
that collective bargaining agreements and law enforcement officers' bills of
rights ("LEOBORs") are impediments to police accountability); Black Lives Matter
Publishes 'Campaign Zero' Plan to Reduce Police Violence, NPR: All Things
Considered (Aug. 26, 2015, 5:42 PM),
http://www.npr.org/2015/08/26/434975505/black-lives-matter-publishes-campaign-ze
ro-plan-to-reduce-police-violence; see also Developments in the Law - Policing,
128 Harv. L. Rev. 1706 (2015) (discussing the law regulating policing, but not
delving into labor law); Kevin M. Keenan & Samuel Walker, An Impediment to
Police Accountability? An Analysis of Statutory Law Enforcement Officers' Bills
of Rights, 14 B.U. Pub. Int. L.J. 185 (2005). But see Kate Levine, Police
Suspects, 116 Colum. L. Rev. 1197, 1234-35 (2016) (urging that critics are
mistaken to advocate eliminating procedural protections for officers suspected
of wrongdoing and instead that the investigative protections available to
officers should be extended to all criminal suspects). Part III of this Article:
discusses the points of agreement and disagreement with these scholars.





n21.  See Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 243 (advocating reduction of LEOBOR
protections); Levine, supra note 20, at 1235 (advocating extending LEOBOR
protections to all suspects); Jonah Newman, Can Chicago Take on Police Union
Contracts This Year?, Chi. Rep. (Jan. 9, 2017),
http://chicagoreporter.com/can-chicago-take-on-police-union-contracts-this-year/
.





n22.  See Cleveland Bd. of Educ. v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 540-41 (1985)
(public employee with property interest in employment who faces disciplinary
discharge is entitled to pre-termination and post-termination procedural
protections); Bishop v. Wood, 426 U.S. 341, 343-44 (1976) (observing, in case
involving discipline of police officer, that "[a] property interest in
employment can, of course, be created by ordinance, or by an implied contract");
Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593, 602-03 (1972) (junior college professor had a
right to claim a property interest in continued employment even in absence of a
tenure system because the faculty guide created an expectation of tenure).





n23.  See Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493, 500 (1967); see also Steven D.
Clymer, Compelled Statements from Police Officers and Garrity Immunity, 76
N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1309, 1312 (2001) (noting that many courts find such statements
to be "the equivalent of formally immunized testimony" under Garrity).





n24.  See Heffernan v. City of Paterson, 136 S. Ct. 1412, 1417-19 (2016); cf.
U.S. Civil Serv. Comm'n v. Nat'l Ass'n of Letter Carriers, 413 U.S. 548, 556
(1973) (reaffirming the constitutionality of laws limiting certain political
activities of federal employees).





n25.  See, e.g., Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.§§38-1101 to 38-1104 (2015); Cal. Gov't
Code §§3301-3311 (West 2010); Del. Code Ann. tit. 11,§§9200-9209 (2015); Fla.
Stat. § 112.532 (2016); 50 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 725/3 (West 2014); Ky. Rev.
Stat. Ann. § 15.520 (West 2010); Md. Code Ann., Pub. Safety § 3-104 (LexisNexis
2011); Minn. Stat. § 626.89 (2014); Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 289.060 (LexisNexis
2013); N.M. Stat. Ann. § 29-14-4 (2013); 42 R.I. Gen. Laws § 42-28.6-2 (2007);
Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Ann.§§143.051, 143.123 (West 2008); Va. Code Ann. § 9.1-501
(2012); W. Va. Code Ann. § 8-14A-2 (LexisNexis 2012).





n26.  See infra Section I.C.2.





n27.  See Rushin, supra note 20, at 1198; Seth W. Stoughton, The Incidental
Regulation of Policing, 98 Minn. L. Rev. 2179, 2205-17 (2014). Law professor
David Sklansky and criminologist Samuel Walker have published their works on
police unions in policing journals, but few other scholars' works on police
unions have appeared in law reviews. See, e.g., Monique Marks & David Sklansky,
Introduction: The Role of the Ranks and File and Police Unions in Police Reform,
18 Policing and Soc'y 1 (2008), reprinted in Police Reform from the Bottom Up 1
(Monique Marks & David Sklanksy eds., 2012) (a reproduction of special issues of
two journals: Police Prac. & Res., May 2008, and 18 Policing and Soc'y, no. 1,
2008); Samuel Walker, The Neglect of Police Unions: Exploring One of the Most
Important Areas of American Policing, Police Prac. & Res., May 2008, at 95,
reprinted in Police Reform from the Bottom Up, supra, at 88; cf. Harmon, supra
note 20 (published in the Michigan Law Review).





n28.  Samuel Walker, The Neglect of Police Unions: Exploring One of the Most
Important Areas of American Policing, Police Prac. & Res., May 2008, at 95, 95
(noting that although police chiefs and civil rights activists "frequently
allege that the police union prevents the fair and thorough investigation of
officer misconduct and the proper discipline of officers who have in fact
engaged in improper activity[,] social scientists should not take these
allegations at face value, since they are made by persons with a direct interest
in the issues involved"). As noted above, see supra note 20, very recently legal
scholars have begun to examine certain aspects of police labor and employment
relations, but this Article: is the only law review piece that systematically
studies the role of police unions as institutions.





n29.  See, e.g., Brigham R. Frandsen, The Effects of Collective Bargaining
Rights on Public Employee Compensation: Evidence from Teachers, Firefighters,
and Police, 69 ILR Rev. 84, 85 (2016).





n30.  As Stephen Rushin says in his analysis of police union contracts, legal
scholars have only recently discussed the impact of labor and employment law on
police behavior. Rushin, supra note 20, at 1198.





n31.  Until Rushin, supra note 20, the only content analysis of police union
contracts was a 1992 content analysis of 328 contracts. David L. Carter & Allen
D. Sapp, A Comparative Analysis of Clauses in Police Collective Bargaining
Agreements as Indicators of Change in Labor Relations, 12 Am. J. Police, no. 2,
1993, at 17, 19.





n32.  Frandsen, supra note 29, at 84-85.





n33.  George L. Kelling & Robert B. Kliesmet, Police Unions, Police Culture, and
Police Abuse of Force, in Police Violence 191, 192 (William A. Geller & Hans
Toch eds., 1996).





n34.  See, e.g., A Vision for Black Lives: Policy Demands for Black Power,
Freedom, & Justice, Movement for Black Lives,
https://policy.m4bl.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Comm
ControlofLawEnforcement-OnePager.pdf (last visited Mar. 19, 2017); President's
Task Force on 21st Century Policing, Final Report of the President's Task Force
on 21st Century Policing (2015), https://cops.usdoj.gov/pdf/taskforce/taskforce
finalreport.pdf.





n35.  See, e.g., Rushin, supra note 20, at 1199.





n36.  The specifics of the proposal are laid out in Part IV.





n37.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9.





n38.  See id. For a description of the wide variety of policing organizations
that exist, see Peter K. Manning, Policing Contingencies 43-45 (2003).





n39.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9; see also Colleen Kadleck, Police Employee
Organizations, 26 Policing 341, 345 (2003) (using a national sample of police
employee organizations, explores the variety in their structure, membership and
perspectives on labor relations).





n40.  David Alan Sklansky, Not Your Father's Police Department: Making Sense of
the New Demographics of Law Enforcement, 96 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1209, 1209
(2006); see also Egon Bittner, Aspects of Police Work 25 (1990); Marks &
Sklansky, supra note 27, at 1, 3. This structure is a historical accident having
do with the origins of the modern police in England. See Jerome H. Skolnick &
James J. Fyfe, Above the Law 116-17 (1993).





n41.  See Skolnick & Fyfe, supra note 40, at 117-18; Peter K. Manning, A
Dialectic of Organisational and Occupational Culture, in Police Occupational
Culture 47, 47 (Megan O'Neill et al. eds., 2007). This command structure is the
result of one of the three different eras of police reform. See George L.
Kelling & Mark H. Moore, The Evolving Strategy of Policing, in Community
Policing 96, 97-114 (Willard M. Olivier ed., 2000). In Seattle, for example, the
chain of command is as follows: Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, Assistant Chief,
Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, then officers and detectives. Department Fact
Sheet, Seattle Police Dep't,
http://www.seattle.gov/police/about-us/about-the-department/department-fact-shee
t (last visited Apr. 1, 2017).





n42.  See Manning, supra note 41, at 70 ("[The top command] is composed of
officers above the rank of superintendent (or commander) including chief, and
deputy chief or assistant chief."). Detectives are typically considered a
separate group from patrol officers and have a higher status. See id. at 64; see
also Wesley Skogan, Why Reforms Fail, in Police Reform from the Bottom Up, supra
note 27, at 144, 148.





n43.  See Manning, supra note 41, at 70.





n44.  See id. at 64.





n45.  Marks & Sklansky, supra note 27, at 1.





n46.  See Manning, supra note 41, at 69 (observing that middle management
consists of the "sergeant, lieutenant, inspector, chief inspector and
superintendent or their equivalents" who are "symbolically located between
command and other officers").





n47.  See Skogan, supra note 42, at 146.





n48.  See Manning, supra note 41, at 63, 67. In fact, sometimes sergeants are
considered part of the rank-and-file. See David H. Bayley, Police Reform: Who
Done It?, in Police Reform from the Bottom Up, supra note 27, at 16, 23.





n49.  See Manning, supra note 41, at 63. Unless otherwise noted, the discussion
of the rank-and-file excludes detectives.





n50.  Id. at 63.





n51.  Id. at 54.





n52.  See Bittner, supra note 40, at 137; Manning, supra note 38, at 49; Eugene
A. Paoline III, Taking Stock: Toward a Richer Understanding of Police Culture,
31 J. Crim. Just. 199, 203 (2003) ("Uniformity in appearance, attitude, and
behavior, as well as strict adherence to rules and procedures, is expected of
all recruits."); David N. Allen, Police Supervision on the Street: An Analysis
of Supervisor/Officer Interaction During the Shift, 10 J. Crim. Just. 91, 92
(1982) (noting the strict and unquestioning obedience required of the
rank-and-file).





n53.  Erwin Chemerinsky, An Independent Analysis of the Los Angeles Police
Department's Board of Inquiry Report on the Rampart Scandal, 34 Loy. L.A. L.
Rev. 545, 565 (2001); Wesley G. Skogan & Tracey L. Meares, Lawful Policing, 593
Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 66, 67 (2004) ("The organization under which
officers work struggles to keep control of its field force.").





n54.  Skogan, supra note 42, at 145; see also George L. Kelling et al., Police
Accountability and Community Policing, in Community Policing, supra note 41, at
269, 269-70 ("Police chiefs continually worry about abuse of authority ... . As
a consequence, it is not surprising that police leaders have developed
organizational mechanisms of control that seek to ensure police accountability
to both the law and the policies and procedures of police departments."); Hans
Toch, Police Officers as Change Agents in Police Reform, 18 Policing & Soc'y 60,
63 (2008) (noting that management wonders: "Can we really trust those bums to be
honest and law-abiding ... and dedicated?").





n55.  Todd Wuestewald & Brigitte Steinheider, Shared Leadership: Can Empowerment
Work in Police Organizations?, Police Chief, Jan. 2006, at 48, 49,
http://www.policechiefmagazine.org /magazine/index.cfm?fuseaction=print
display&article id=789&issue id=12006. Of course, there are important
exceptions. See, e.g., DOJ Chi. Rep., supra note 10, at 105 (noting deficiencies
in supervisors providing accountability).





n56.  Wuestewald & Steinheider, supra note 55, at 51.





n57.  Skolnick & Fyfe, supra note 40, at 120-21.





n58.  Paoline, supra note 52, at 201.





n59.  Skolnick & Fyfe, supra note 40, at 121.





n60.  Id. at 120-21. Sociologist Egon Bittner terms this the "legality" problem.
See Bittner, supra note 40, at 350-52; see also Michael K. Brown, Working the
Street 9 (1981) (noting that patrol officers "must cope not only with the terror
of an often hostile and unpredictable citizenry, but also with a hostile - even
tyrannical - and unpredictable bureaucracy"); Malcolm K. Sparrow, Implementing
Community Policing, in Community Policing, supra note 41, at 172, 177.





n61.  Chemerinsky, supra note 53, at 547-49.





n62.  Id. at 598.





n63.  Id.





n64.  Joel Rubin & Jack Leonard, LAPD Survey in Wake of Dorner Rampage Finds
Bias Complaints, L.A. Times (Nov. 13, 2014, 11:16 PM),
http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-lapd-dorner-20141114-story.html;
see also Robin Abcarian, She's the Mom of Four Black Men, a Former L.A. Cop and
a Major Skeptic of 'Justifiable' Police Shootings, L.A. Times (July 18, 2016,
3:00 AM),
http://www.latimes.com/local/abcarian/la-me-abcarian-cheryl-dorsey-2016
0718-snap-story.html ("The Dorner tragedy, by the way, also occasioned a spasm
of self-reflection in the LAPD. Chief Charlie Beck surveyed his troops and
discovered a widespread perception that the LAPD dispensed discipline unfairly,
based on skin color, rank and nepotism.").





n65.  DOJ Balt. Rep., supra note 13, at 147.





n66.  Jeffrey Fagan et al, Street Stops and Police Legitimacy in New York, in
Comparing the Democratic Governance of Police Intelligence 203, 219 (Thierry
Delpeuch & Jacqueline E. Ross eds., 2016) (citing Akiva M. Liberman et al.,
Routine Occupational Stress and Psychological Distress in Police, 25 Policing
421, 423, 432 (2002)).





n67.  Id.; see also Christopher Robbins, NYPD: Dry-Humping Is OK, but Throwing
Football Is Misconduct, Gothamist (Sept. 19, 2011, 1:37 PM),
http://gothamist.com/2011/09/19/nypd dry-humping ok throwing footba.php.





n68.  Paoline, supra note 52, at 201 (quoting Brown, supra note 60, at 80); see
also Skogan & Meares, supra note 53, at 79 ("Traditionally, police management
consists of overseeing subordinates until they break a rule in the book and then
punishing them. It is essentially negative, with little in their management
kitbag but sanctions for noncompliance; hence, the emphasis on internal
inspections to ensure compliance with rules.").





n69.  Manning, supra note 41, at 73; see Paoline, supra note 52, at 204
("Officers must also provide protection to one another against supervisors, in
the organizational environment, who are often viewed as 'out to make their jobs
difficult.'"); Kelling et al., supra note 54, at 277 (noting that officers see
discipline as "arbitrary and unjust").





n70.  See Chemerinsky, supra note 53, at 565-66; see also David H. Bayley,
Police for the Future 64 (1994) ("Because police officers are almost always at
risk of violating some stricture, management is perceived by police officers as
oppressive and quixotic."); Sparrow, supra note 60, at 177.





n71.  Skolnick & Fyfe, supra note 40, at 122 ("Esprit among police is desirable
and necessary, but when coupled with the necessity of routine violations of the
rules in order to get the job done, it delegitimizes everything the brass
does.").





n72.  Bittner, supra note 40, at 143-44; see also Chemerinsky, supra note 53, at
565 (relating being "stunned by the extent of hostility to the Chief of Police
and the command staff" within the LAPD).





n73.  See infra Section I.C.





n74.  See Manning, supra note 41, at 68. "Very little direct exchange unites
[top command] and officers and this relationship shows the greatest social
distance, ambivalence, and animosity." Id. And, when things go wrong, such as a
fatal shooting, top management "in general acts first and asks questions later."
Id.





n75.  See Bittner, supra note 40, at 152; Skolnick & Fyfe, supra note 40, at 121
("This sense of isolation is exacerbated by the difficulty of communicating up
and down the rigid chains of command that characterize the military-style
hierarchy.").





n76.  See Manning, supra note 38, at 246 ("The segments of the culture, a
response to hierarchy, isolation, and information based at the bottom,
communicate more within than across, creating constant misunderstandings and a
sense of arbitrary discipline."); Chemerinsky, supra note 53, at 565 (noting the
alienation between the rank-and-file and top command within the LAPD).





n77.  See Brown, supra note 60, at 94 ("Hierarchical controls ... increase group
solidarity and loyalty among patrolmen and the dependence of a patrolman upon
his immediate peer group, while exacerbating the ongoing conflict between
patrolmen and administrators."); see also Paoline, supra note 52, at 200
("Viewing police culture as an occupational phenomena suggests that officers
collectively confront situations that arise in the environments of policing, and
subsequent attitudes, values, and norms that result are in response to those
environments."); cf. James C. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance 199
(1990) (discussing creation of forest poaching subculture in face of property
rights of others viewed as illegitimate).





n78.  Skolnick & Fyfe, supra note 40, at 122; see also Toch, supra note 54, at
61 ("A code of conduct can evolve in the locker room that appears to tolerate
transgressions and discourages 'snitching' on peers.").





n79.  Paoline, supra note 52, at 201 (emphasis removed).





n80.  See David Alan Sklansky, Seeing Blue: Police Reform, Occupational Culture,
and Cognitive Burn-In, in Police Occupational Culture, supra note 41, at 19, 38
("An influential study in the early 1980s argued that 'management cops' have
their own culture, separate and distinct from 'street cop culture.'"); Toch,
supra note 54, at 63. See generally Bayley, supra note 70 , at 66; Elizabeth
Reuss-Ianni, Two Cultures of Policing: Street Cops and Management Cops (1983).





n81.  Toch, supra note 54, at 63; see also Sklansky, supra note 80, at 25;
Chemerinsky, supra note 53, at 565.





n82.  Kelling & Moore, supra note 41, at 98-99.





n83.  See id. at 100-01.





n84.  Id. at 102, 108.





n85.  Id. at 108.





n86.  Id. at 103.





n87.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 193; Samuel Walker, "Broken Windows"
and Fractured History: The Use and Misuse of History in Recent Police Patrol
Analysis, in Community Policing, supra note 41, at 326, 328 ("The most
professionalized departments, in fact, took extra measures to de-personalize
policing. Frequent rotation of beat assignments was adopted as a strategy to
combat corruption.").





n88.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 193; see also Sklansky, supra note
80, at 20, 23.





n89.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 203-04.





n90.  See id. at 193; see also Samuel Walker, The Police in America 14 (2d ed.
1992). Police reformers viewed officers "as a tightly controlled and inherently
limited functionary whose primary, if not sole, role was nondiscretionary law
enforcement." Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 194 (citing George L.
Kelling & James K. "Chips" Stewart, The Evolution of Contemporary Policing, in
Local Government Police Management 3 (William A. Geller ed., 3d ed. 1991)). In
part, this model of strict control of the rank-and-file was in line with the
Frederick Taylor model for routinizing factory work. Sklansky, supra note 80, at
31. The Taylorism model focuses on top-down control of workers through rigid
rules. Wuestewald & Steinheider, supra note 55, at 49 ("The scientific and
bureaucratic management principles of Frederick Taylor and Max Weber were in
vogue and found welcome application in the drive to professionalize law
enforcement.").





n91.  See Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 195 (citing Malcolm K. Sparrow
et al., Beyond 911: A New Era for Policing 36-37 (1990)); see also Kelling &
Moore, supra note 41, at 102 (noting concerns with "separating police from
politics").





n92.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 195 (citing Sparrow et al., supra
note 91, at 36-37).





n93.  Walker, supra note 87, at 328.





n94.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 195-96.





n95.  See Scott Lewis et al., Acceptance of Community Policing Among Police
Officers and Police Administrators, 22 Policing 567, 567-68 (1999); Kelling &
Moore, supra note 41, at 109; see also Steve Herbert, 'Hard Charger' or 'Station
Queen'? Policing and the Masculinist State, 8 Gender, Place & Culture 55, 62
(2001).





n96.  See Seth Stoughton, Law Enforcement's "Warrior" Problem, 128 Harv. L. Rev.
F. 225, 228 (2015). See generally Michael J. Palmiotto, Community Policing: A
Policing Strategy for the 21st Century (2000).





n97.  See generally Palmiotto, supra note 96.





n98.  Kelling & Moore, supra note 41, at 109-13; see also Bureau of Justice
Assistance, U.S. Dep't of Justice, Understanding Community Policing 9 (1994),
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles/commp.pdf ("In 1979, Herman Goldstein developed
and advanced the concept of 'problem-oriented policing' (POP), which encouraged
police to begin thinking differently about their purpose. Goldstein suggested
that problem resolution constituted the true, substantive work of policing and
advocated that police identify and address root causes of problems that lead to
repeat calls for service. POP required a move from a reactive, incident-oriented
stance to one that actively addressed the problems that continually drained
police resources.") (citing Herman Goldstein, Improving Policing: A Problem
Oriented Approach, 25 Crime & Delinq. 236, 241-43 (1979)); Kelling & Kliesmet,
supra note 33, at 202-03.





n99.  See generally Palmiotto, supra note 96; Sara Satinsky et al., Human Impact
Partners, Stress on the Streets (SOS) 17 (2015),
http://www.trustnottrauma.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/HIP
Stress-on-the-Streets FullReport.pdf ("By the 1990s the concepts of
community-oriented policing and problem-solving policing were merged into a form
used widely today that encourages officers to understand and analyze the roots
of problems, then to solve and evaluate them in ways that may include looking
beyond the criminal justice system for solutions.").





n100.  L. Song Richardson & Phillip Atiba Goff, Interrogating Racial Violence,
12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 115, 143-44 (2014) (citing Herbert, supra note 95, at
63; and Kelling et al., supra note 54, at 270).





n101.  Wesley G. Skogan, The Promise of Community Policing, in Police Innovation
27, 27 (David Weisburd & Anthony A. Braga eds., 2006) ("By 2000, a federal
survey ... found that more than 90 percent of departments in cities over 250,000
in population reported having full-time, trained community policing officers in
the field." (citation omitted)). However, community policing involves a number
of different practices, including patrolling on foot, or with bikes, horses, or
segways. Id. Some communities "train civilians in citizen police academies, open
small neighborhood storefront offices, conduct surveys to measure community
satisfaction, canvass door-to-door to identify local problems, publish
newsletters, conduct drug education projects, and work with municipal agencies
to enforce health and safety regulations." Id.





n102.  See generally Steve Herbert, Citizens, Cops, and Power 94-109 (2006);
Kelling & Moore, supra note 41, at 97, 101-02.





n103.  See generally Graham Boyd, Collateral Damage in the War on Drugs, 47
Vill. L. Rev. 839 (2002); Dan Gardner, Civil Liberties Cast Aside in Overzealous
Drug War, Chi. Sun-Times, Feb. 4, 2001, at 30A (recognizing police methods used
to prevent drug crimes); Punishment and Prejudice: Racial Disparities in the War
on Drugs, Hum. Rts. Watch (May 2000), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2000/usa.





n104.  See U.S. Dep't of Justice & Police Exec. Research Forum, Compstat: Its
Origins, Evolution, and Future in Law Enforcement Agencies 2-6 (2013),
https://www.bja.gov/publications/perf-compstat.pdf [hereinafter DOJ Compstat
Rep.].





n105.  See Palmiotto, supra note 96, at 174-95. See generally DOJ Compstat Rep.,
supra note 104, at 3-8. More recently, predictive policing and other algorithms,
Chicago heat lists, and big data are the new policing technologies. "Yet, an
increased reliance today on technology to analyze and predict problems, in
addition to outfitting police with weaponry that creates urban 'warriors,' can
distance police from the communities they serve." Satinsky et al., supra note
99, at 17.





n106.  Saki Knafo, A Black Police Officer's Fight Against the N.Y.P.D., N.Y.
Times Mag. (Feb. 18, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/21/magazine/a-black-police-officers-fight-agains
t-the-nypd.html; see also DOJ Compstat Rep., supra note 104, at 3-6.





n107.  Knafo, supra note 106.





n108.  Id.





n109.  Id.





n110.  Id.





n111.  Id.





n112.  Id.





n113.  Id.





n114.  Id. ("In districtwide CompStat meetings, executives interrogated
commanders about their violent-crime statistics. Some commanders tried to
protect themselves by underreporting or reclassifying major crimes. Others tried
to show they were being 'proactive'; invariably this meant more stops, more
summonses, more arrests.").





n115.  Id.





n116.  Id.





n117.  Id.





n118.  Id.





n119.  David Alan Sklansky, Democracy and the Police 181, 183 (2008).





n120.  Id. at 183.





n121.  Id. at 181.





n122.  Id.





n123.  See Robert M. Fogelson, Big-City Police 193-94, 198-99, 201 (1977);
Hervey A. Juris & Peter Feuille, Police Unionism 15 (1973); Margaret Levi,
Bureaucratic Insurgency 27-56 (1977); Joseph E. Slater, Public Workers 17
(2004).





n124.  Slater, supra note 123, at 24-25.





n125.  Id.





n126.  Id.





n127.  See id. at 17.





n128.  Id. (quoting John R. Commons, Labor and Administration 111-12 (Augustus
M. Kelley 1964) (1913)).





n129.  Id. at 25.





n130.  Id. at 26.





n131.  See id. at 13, 27.





n132.  Id. at 13-14.





n133.  See id. at 35-37; Juris & Feuille, supra note 123, at 16-17. In September
1919, the Boston Police Commissioner banned the police union, and a strike
resulted. Joanne Klein, History of Police Unions, in 5 Encyclopedia of
Criminology and Criminal Justice 2207, 2211 (Gerben Bruinsma & David Weisburd
eds., 2014). President Wilson called the strike a "crime against civilization,"
one that rang of a Bolshevik threat and Communist undertones. See id. After
rioting and looting, all 1,147 strikers were dismissed. Slater, supra note 123,
at 14. This event stalled the momentum that had been building in other cities to
establish police unions. See id.





n134.  See Juris & Feuille, supra note 123, at 17-18; see also Kelling &
Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 196.





n135.  See A History of the Fraternal Order of Police, Fraternal Ord. Police,
https://www.fop.net/CmsPage.aspx?id=13 [https://perma.cc/74DV-NT8L] (last
visited Mar. 25, 2017); AFSCME: 75 Years of History, AFSCME,
http://www.afscme.org/union/history/afscme-75-years-of-history
[https://perma.cc/9C2R-RTME] (last visited Mar. 25, 2017); see also Juris &
Feuille, supra note 123, at 17-18.





n136.  Slater, supra note 123, at 9. See id. at 158-92, for a more complete
discussion.





n137.  See Fogelson, supra note 123, at 193-96; Levi, supra note 123, at 122-23,
144; see also Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 196. One of the authors,
Kliesmet, "was harassed, arrested, and eventually fired for his union activities
while a member of the Milwaukee Police Department. (Both the arrest and firing
were later overturned.)" Id.





n138.  E.g., Local 201, AFSCME v. City of Muskegon, 120 N.W.2d 197, 199 (Mich.
1963) (reasoning that a police officer cannot join a union because he is
"required by law and invariably becomes a neutralizer in controversies involving
the right of public assemblage, neighborhood disputes, domestic difficulties and
strikes, between labor and management" and "his actions in these instances must
be governed by his oath of office").





n139.  Slater, supra note 123, at 96.





n140.  Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 196.





n141.  Id. at 196-97.





n142.  See id. at 196 (quoting Juris & Feuille, supra note 123, at 20-21).





n143.  Id. at 196-97 (citing Juris & Feuille, supra note 123, at 138). These
punishments included punitive transfers. Juris & Feuille, supra note 123, at
138.





n144.  See Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 206-10 (describing protections of
bills of rights). See generally Levine, supra note 20 (describing LEOBOR
protections against interrogation and other investigative techniques commonly
used for other people suspected of wrongdoing and arguing that the protections
should be extended to all criminal suspects rather than eliminated for police).





n145.  See Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 186, 189, 190-91.





n146.  See infra Part II.





n147.  Adeshina Emmanuel, How Union Contracts Shield Police Departments from DOJ
Reforms, In These Times (June 21, 2016),
http://inthesetimes.com/features/police-killings-union-contracts.html.





n148.  Nonprobationary government employees enjoy a constitutional due process
right to notice and some form of hearing before being fired from a job. Cf.  Bd.
of Regents of State Colls. v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 573-74 (1972) (holding that
professor on probation was not denied due process when university did not hold
hearing and failed to rehire); Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593, 599 (1972)
(explaining Roth). However, if an employee does not have an expectation of
continued employment, he is not entitled to due process before termination of
the job.  Bishop v. Wood, 426 U.S. 341, 345, 347 (1976) (holding that city
police officer held his position at will and was therefore not entitled to due
process before termination).





n149.  See supra notes 25, 144 and accompanying text.





n150.  See Levine, supra note 20, at 1224-25, 1224 n.140.





n151.  See generally Clyde Summers, Bargaining in the Government's Business:
Principles and Politics, 18 U. Tol. L. Rev. 265, 269-71 (1987) (explaining the
principle of exclusive representation and questioning certain aspects of its
viability).





n152.  See Emporium Capwell Co. v. W. Addition Cmty. Org., 420 U.S. 50, 62
(1975).





n153.  See Catherine L. Fisk & Benjamin I. Sachs, Restoring Equity in
Right-to-Work Law, 4 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 857, 874 (2014).





n154.  See Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 198-99.





n155.  Id. at 197.





n156.  Id. at 198.





n157.  Id. at 197. Unions began to use various rules to exercise
"countercontrol," including "the Constitution; federal statutes; state statutes
and regulations; city ordinances; internal budget and personnel regulations and
directives; Equal Employment Opportunity rules and affirmative action plans and
court decrees; public disclosure, privacy, and administrative law rules; general
orders; squad or division rules, directives, and guidelines; and personnel
records." Id.





n158.  Id. at 193-97.





n159.  Cf., e.g., Salary and Benefits, Metropolitan Police Dep't,
http://mpdc.dc.gov/page/salary-and-benefits (last visited Mar. 22, 2017).
Contracts for dozens of police departments were obtained by public records act
requests and made available online. See Police Contracts Database,
CheckthePolice.org http://www.checkthepolice.org/database/ (last visited Mar.
22, 2017). We downloaded from that site contracts from: Albuquerque, Anaheim,
Anchorage, Aurora, Austin, Bakersfield, Baltimore, Baton Rouge, Berkeley,
Beverly Hills, Boston, Buffalo, Burbank, Carlsbad, Chandler, Chicago, Chico,
Chula Vista, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Columbus, Corpus Christi, Costa Mesa,
Cypress, Dallas, Daly City, Denver, Detroit, District of Columbia Metro, Duluth,
Durham, East Palo Alto, El Paso, Eureka, Fort Wayne, Fremont, Fresno, Glendale,
Hayward, Henderson, Hialeah, Honolulu, Houston, Indianapolis, Irvine,
Jacksonville, Jersey City, Kansas City, Laredo, Las Vegas, Lexington, Long
Beach, Los Angeles, Los Angeles County, Louisville, Madison, Memphis, Mesa,
Miami, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, Nashville, New York City, Newark, North Las
Vegas, Oakland, Oklahoma City, Omaha, Orlando, Pasadena, Philadelphia, Phoenix,
Pittsburgh, Portland, Redwood City, Reno, Rialto, Richmond (CA), Riverside,
Rochester, Sacramento, San Antonio, San Diego, San Francisco, San Jose, San
Leandro, San Mateo, Santa Ana, Santa Barbara, Santa Cruz, Seattle, Spokane, St.
Louis, St. Paul, St. Petersburg, Stockton, Tampa, Toledo, Tucson, Tulsa, and
Wichita.





n160.  See, e.g., Memorandum of Understanding Between the Baltimore City Police
Department and the Baltimore City Lodge No. 3, Fraternal Order of Police, Inc.
Unit I: Fiscal Years 2014-2016 [hereinafter Balt. Police Union Memorandum];
Memorandum of Understanding No. 24 Between the City of Los Angeles and the Los
Angeles Police Protective League (2011) [hereinafter L.A. Police Union
Memorandum].





n161.  See, e.g., Agreement Between the City of Chicago Department of Police and
the Fraternal Order of Police Chicago Lodge No. 7 Effective 2012-2017 arts. 8,
10 (describing employee security and nondiscrimination provisions).





n162.  See, e.g., Labor Agreement Between the Government of the District of
Columbia Metropolitan Police Department and the Fraternal Order of Police MPD
Labor Committee: Effective FY 2004-FY 2008 art. 19; L.A. Police Union
Memorandum, supra note 160, arts. 8-10; Memorandum of Understanding Between the
Anaheim Police Association and the City of Anaheim January 8, 2010-July 7, 2011
art. 55.





n163.  See, e.g., Balt. Police Union Memorandum, supra note 160, arts. 6, 16;
see also Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 199-201.





n164.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 197; see also Karoliszyn, supra
note 9.





n165.  See Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 198.





n166.  See id. at 199.





n167.  Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, 1968 Cal. Stat. 2725 (codified at Cal. Gov't
Code §§3500-3511).





n168.  More accurately, the MMBA is typical of the subset of state public sector
labor statutes that grant full collective bargaining rights to government
employees. Some states (e.g., Virginia and North Carolina) prohibit public
employee bargaining entirely, some (e.g., Wisconsin and Tennessee) sharply limit
it, and some (e.g., Missouri) have a patchwork of rules that leave the status
and functions of public employee unions to the development of local practice.
See Malin et al., supra note 19, at 367-69 (noting that "at the turn of the
twenty-first century, there were more than 110 separate public-sector labor
laws"; "twenty-nine states ... allowed collective bargaining for all ... public
employees"; thirteen allowed bargaining only for some types of employees; and
eight did not allow any public worker bargaining); Indep.-Nat'l Educ. Ass'n v.
Indep. Sch. Dist., 223 S.W.3d 131, 135-40 (Mo. 2007) (en banc) (detailing
Missouri bargaining rules).





n169.  Cal. Gov't Code § 3504 (West, Westlaw through Chapter 791 of 2016 Reg.
Sess., Ch. 8 of 2015-2016 2nd Ex. Sess., and all propositions on 2016 ballot).





n170.  Int'l Ass'n of Fire Fighters, Local 188 v. Pub. Emp't Relations Bd., 245
P.3d 845, 852 (Cal. 2011) (quoting Fire Fighters Union, Local 1186 v. City of
Vallejo, 526 P.2d 971, 976 (Cal. 1974)).





n171.  Gov't § 3504; Claremont Police Officer's Ass'n v. City of Claremont, 139
P.3d 532, 536 (Cal. 2006).





n172.  Claremont Police Officer's Ass'n, 139 P.3d at 537 (quoting Fire Fighters
Union, Local 1186, 526 P.2d at 976).





n173.  203 Cal. Rptr. 494 (Ct. App. 1984).





n174.  Id. at 496.





n175.  Id. at 504-05.





n176.  144 Cal. Rptr. 638, 646-47 (Ct. App. 1978).





n177.  Id. at 645.





n178.  Id.





n179.  143 Cal. Rptr. 255 (Ct. App. 1977).





n180.  Id. at 258.





n181.  Id.





n182.  Id.





n183.  Id. at 260.





n184.  Long Beach Police Officer Ass'n v. City of Long Beach, 203 Cal. Rptr.
494, 504-05 (Ct. App. 1984).





n185.  83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 494 (Ct. App. 2008).





n186.  Id. at 498.





n187.  Id. at 499-500.





n188.  Id. at 510.





n189.  Id.





n190.  See Ass'n of Orange Cty. Deputy Sheriffs v. County of Orange, 158 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 135, 146-47 (Ct. App. 2013) ("The change in practice implemented by the
Sheriff's order, therefore, ... constitutes a fundamental managerial decision,
falling within the Department's 'freedom to manage its affairs unrelated to
employment.' The Association does not identify any results from, or effects of,
the Sheriff's order, which are subject to bargaining.") (citation omitted)
(quoting Int'l Ass'n of Fire Fighters, Local 188 v. Pub. Emp't Relations Bd.,
245 P.3d 845, 852 (Cal. 2011)).





n191.  See infra Part IV.





n192.  See infra Part IV.





n193.  See generally Timothy D. Chandler & Rafael Gely, Protective Service
Unions, Political Activities, and Bargaining Outcomes, 5 J. Pub. Admin. Res. &
Theory 295, 312-13 (1995) (finding that electoral political activity by police
and firefighter unions is a more important determinant of wages and employment
levels than unionization); Casey Ichniowski et al., Collective Bargaining Laws,
Threat Effects, and the Determination of Police Compensation, 7 J. Lab. Econ.
191, 191, 205-06 (1989) (finding that "state laws that provide stronger
bargaining rights and ensure closure to the bargaining process increase the
direct effect of police unions on compensation"); see also Police Union
Pressures Amazon.com to Halt "Black Lives Matter" Sales, Democracy Now! (Dec.
27, 2016), https://www.democracynow.org/2016/12/27/headlines/police union
pressures amazoncom to halt black lives matter sales.





n194.  See generally Levine, supra note 20, at 1220-27. As noted in the DOJ
Chicago Report, some barriers to accountability for misconduct are also created
by management without apparent legislative or union-negotiated pressure. The DOJ
stated:



    Our investigation revealed that the City fails to conduct any investigation
of nearly half of police misconduct complaints and that a number of
institutional barriers contribute to this fact. There are provisions in the
City's agreements with the unions that impede the investigative process, such as
the general requirement that a complainant sign a sworn affidavit and
limitations on investigating anonymous complaints and older incidents of
misconduct. That said, the union agreements contain override provisions for some
of these provisions that the City rarely utilizes. Other barriers have been
created solely by the City, such as internal policies allowing investigative
agencies to truncate investigations of serious misconduct through mediation,
administratively close complaints deemed less serious, and ignore mandatory
investigations into uses of force that could identify misconduct or faulty
training issues.



    DOJ Chi. Rep., supra note 10, at 47. The DOJ also found procedures used in
the circumstances where investigations are conducted hampered the search for
truth and its description of those procedures makes clear that blame for them is
widespread:



    Witnesses and accused officers are frequently not interviewed at all, or not
interviewed until long after the incident when memories have faded. When
interviews do occur, questioning is often biased in favor of officers, and
witness coaching by union attorneys is prevalent and unimpeded - a dynamic
neither we nor our law enforcement experts had seen to nearly such an extent in
other agencies. Investigators routinely fail to collect probative evidence. The
procedures surrounding investigations allow for ample opportunity for collusion
among officers and are devoid of any rules prohibiting such coordination. We
found that a lack of resources and investigative training contribute to these
investigative problems. We also found that investigations foundered because of
the pervasive cover-up culture among CPD officers, which the accountability
entities accept as an immutable fact rather than something to root out.



    Id.





n195.  See Christopher Lasch, The Agony of the American Left 206-07 (1969);
Jerome H. Skolnick, The Politics of Protest 274-78 (1969); John Thomas Delaney &
Peter Feuille, Police, in Collective Bargaining in American Industry 265, 301
(David B. Lipsky & Clifford B. Donn eds., 1987); see also Stephen C. Halpern,
Police-Association and Department Leaders 93-99 (1974).





n196.  See Alex Altman, Why New York Cops Turned Their Backs on Mayor de Blasio,
Time (Dec. 22, 2014),
http://time.com/3644168/new-york-police-de-blasio-wenjian-liu-rafael-ramos/; see
also Josh Dawsey, New York City Police Vent Frustrations at Mayor de Blasio,
Wall St. J. (Aug. 1, 2016, 9:09 PM),
https://www.wsj.com/articles/new-york-city-police-vent-frustrations-at-mayor-de-
blasio-1470100169.





n197.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9.





n198.  DOJ Chi. Rep., supra note 10, at 117.





n199.  Id. at 118.





n200.  See Barbara E. Armacost, Organizational Culture and Police Misconduct, 72
Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 453, 455-56 (2004).





n201.  Id.





n202.  See, e.g., Justin George, New Online Fundraising Campaign Starts Up for
Officers Charged in Gray's Death, Balt. Sun (May 6, 2015, 12:34 PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/blog/bs-md-ci-freddie-gray-offic
ers-fund-20150506-story.html. After the Baltimore police union's GoFundMe site
was shut down by the company because GoFundMe pages cannot benefit people
charged with "serious violations of the law," the union backed fundraising on a
site devoted specifically to raising money for law enforcement officers. Id.
Union president Gene Ryan said the charges against the officers were "an
apparent rush to judgment." Id.





n203.  See id.; Sarah Parvini, GoFundMe Shuts Down Fund-Raising Page for
Baltimore Police, L.A. Times (May 2, 2015, 1:59 PM),
http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-gofundme-baltimore-cops-20150502-story.html;
Lorrie Taylor, Cleveland Police Union to Raffle Gun in Fundraiser for Officer
Accused of Shooting Teen, Fox 8 Cleveland (July 28, 2015, 5:44 PM),
http://fox8.com/2015/07/28/cleveland-police-union-to-raffle-gun-in-fundraiser-fo
r-officer-accused-of-shooting-teen/ (reporting that "the Cleveland Police
Patrolman's Union has come under fire for raffling off a Glock pistol to raise
money for an officer accused of shooting an unarmed teenager" and that the union
president said no offense was ever intended and explained, "Raffling off a Glock
in a police community is like raffling off M&Ms at a kid's birthday party");
Christopher Zara, Officer Darren Wilson GoFundMe: Donations Halted as Organizers
Sort Out Legal Questions, Int'l Bus. Times (Sept. 2, 2014, 8:00 PM),
http://www.ibtimes.com/officer-darren-wilson-go
fundme-donations-halted-organizers-sort-out-legal-questions-1676430 (reporting
that a GoFundMe page started by an anonymous donor raised almost a half-million
dollars for Officer Wilson and his defense fund).





n204.  Press Release, N.Y.C. Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, Pat Lynch Says
35-Second Video Doesn't Tell Whole Story and that Resisting or Interfering with
Arrest is Illegal (Oct. 7, 2014),
https://www.nycpba.org/archive/releases/14/pr141007-video.html
[https://perma.cc/8RPY-3KC6].





n205.  See David Firestone, The NYC Police Union Has a Long History of Bullying
City Hall, Quartz (Dec. 23, 2014),
http://qz.com/317338/the-nyc-police-union-has-a-long-history-of-bullying-city-ha
ll/. A full collection of press releases can be found on the PBA's website:
https://www.nycpba.org/releases/index.html.





n206.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9.





n207.  PBA President Talks Re-Election, Contracts & More, NY1: Inside City Hall
(June 1, 2015, 9:40 PM),
http://www.ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/inside-city-hall/2015/06/1/ny1-online--pba-p
resident-talks-re-election--contracts---more.html (statement at 2:20); see Edgar
Sandoval & Reuven Blau, Rev. Al Sharpton Rips Police Union President for
Criticizing Man Who Taped Cops Arresting Eric Garner, N.Y. Daily News (Aug. 4,
2014, 12:05 PM), http://www.nydaily
news.com/new-york/nyc-crime/killed-eric-garner-distraught-article-1.1890415
(quoting PBA President Patrick Lynch as saying that Ramsey Orta, the man who
caught the fatal Garner arrest on video, was "demonizing" officers and was a
"criminal" because he was arrested for allegedly trying to hand off a stolen
gun).





n208.  See infra Sections II.A, II.B.





n209.  Stoughton, supra note 27, at 2211-12.





n210.  Mark Iris, Police Discipline in Chicago: Arbitration or Arbitrary?, 89 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 215, 216 (1998).





n211.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9.





n212.  Police Accountability Task Force, Recommendations for Reform 14 (2016),
https://chicagopatf.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/PATF Final Report 4 13
16-1.pdf.





n213.  See John DeCarlo & Michael J. Jenkins, Labor Unions, Management
Innovation and Organizational Change in Police Departments 2-3 (M.R. Haberfield
ed., 2015); Walker, supra note 90, at 379-80; Walker, supra note 28, at 101
(collecting sources and noting "it is widely believed - but not investigated or
proven - that police unions stifle good management in general, [and] innovation
in particular"); Emmanuel, supra note 147.





n214.  See DeCarlo & Jenkins, supra note 213, at 2; Walker, supra note 90, at
374; Walker, supra note 28, at 102; Emmanuel, supra note 147.





n215.  Kyle Jaeger, The Black Lives Matter Activists Have a Plan: Campaign Zero,
ATTN: (Aug. 26, 2015),
http://www.attn.com/stories/2906/what-is-campaign-zero-black-lives-matter.





n216.  See DeRay McKesson et al., Campaign Zero, Police Union Contracts and
Police Bill of Rights Analysis 4 (2016),
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/559fbf2be
4b08ef197467542/t/5773f695f7e0abbdfe28a1f0/1467217560243/Campaign+Zero+Police+Un
ion +Contract+Report.pdf.





n217.  See George Joseph, Leaked Police Files Contain Guarantees Disciplinary
Records Will Be Kept Secret, Guardian (Feb. 7, 2016, 7:00 AM),
http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/07/leaked-police-files-contain-guara
ntees-disciplinary-records-will-be-kept-secret.





n218.  See Rushin, supra note 20, apps. A, B.





n219.  Id. at 1212, 1220 fig.1.





n220.  Id. at 1196-97.





n221.  Aziz Z. Huq & Richard H. McAdams, Litigating the Blue Wall of Silence:
How to Challenge the Police Privilege to Delay Investigation, 2016 U. Chi. Legal
F. 213, 222 & n.42 (counting twenty LEBORs).





n222.  See Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 203.





n223.  Md. Code Ann., Pub. Safety § 3-104(j)(1)-(2) (LexisNexis 2011).





n224.  See Walker, supra note 20, at 3.





n225.  See Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 217-19.





n226.  Id. at 235.





n227.  S. 1286, 2015-16 Leg., Reg. Sess. (Cal. 2016).





n228.  See id.; see also Patrick McGreevy, Lawmaker Proposes Giving Public
Access to Police Shooting and Misconduct Cases, L.A. Times (Feb. 19, 2016, 11:57
AM), http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-pol-ca-cop-records-story.html.





n229.  See Cal. S. 1286; see also McGreevy, supra note 228.





n230.  See McGreevy, supra note 228.





n231.  See Cal. S. 1286; see also McGreevy, supra note 228.





n232.  McGreevy, supra note 228.





n233.  See id.





n234.  Balt. Police Union Memorandum, supra note 160, art. 16(K).





n235.  See McGreevy, supra note 228.





n236.  See Dallas Police Officer-Involved Shootings, Dallas OpenData,
https://www.dallas
opendata.com/Police/Dallas-Police-Public-Data-Officer-Involved-Shootin/4gmt-jyx2
(last visited Apr. 6, 2017); Police: 2015 Response to Resistance, Dallas
OpenData, https://www.dallasopen
data.com/dataset/Police-2015-Response-to-Resistance/594v-2cnd (last updated Feb.
10, 2017); Leon Neyfakh, A Police Department That's Embraced Reform, Slate (July
8, 2016, 12:10 PM), http://www.slate.com/articles/news and
politics/crime/2016/07/the dallas police department has been a model for
reducing officer involved.html.





n237.  Walker, supra note 20, at 7.





n238.  See Joseph, supra note 217.





n239.  See id.





n240.  See id.





n241.  Rushin, supra note 20, at 1196-97.





n242.  See Keenan & Walker, supra note 20, at 235.





n243.  Police Officer Bill of Rights laws reviewed include: California,
Delaware, Florida, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Nevada,
New Mexico, Rhode Island, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. See Cal. Gov't
Code§§3301-3311 (West 2010); Del. Code Ann. tit. 11,§§9200-9209 (2015); Fla.
Stat § 112.532 (2016); 50 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 725/3 (West 2014); Ky. Rev.
Stat. Ann. § 15.520 (West 2010); La. Stat. Ann. § 40:2531 (Westlaw through the
2017 First Extraordinary session); Md. Code Ann., Pub. Safety§§3-101 to 3-113
(LexisNexis 2011); Minn. Stat. § 626.89 (2014); Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. §
289.020-.120 (LexisNexis 2013); N.M. Stat. Ann. § 29-14-4 (2013); 42 R.I. Gen.
Laws § 42-28.6-2 (2007); Va. Code Ann. § 9.1-501 (2012); W. Va. Code § 8-14A-2
(LexisNexis 2012); Wis. Stat. § 164.01-.06 (West, Westlaw through 2017 Act 2).





n244.  Md. Code Ann., Pub. Safety § 3-104(c)(2) (LexisNexis 2011).





n245.  See supra note 243. See generally Hazel Glenn Beh, Municipal Liability
for Failure to Investigate Citizen Complaints Against the Police, 25 Fordham
Urb. L.J. 209, 216-22 (1998) (describing civilian complaint review procedures).





n246.  See supra note 243. See generally Eduardo L. Calderon & Maria
Hernandez-Figueroa, Citizen Oversight Committees in Law Enforcement 7-8 (2013),
http://cpp.fullerton.edu/pdf/Citizen%20Oversight.pdf (discussing impediments to
the establishment of civilian oversight committees).





n247.  Calderon & Hernandez-Figueroa, supra note 246, at 8. Ironically,
sometimes civilian oversight results in more leniency towards officers. See,
e.g., Kate Mather & David Zahniser, A Proposal to Give Civilians More Say in
LAPD's Disciplinary System Could End Up More Lenient on Officers, L.A. Times
(Jan. 10, 2017, 3:00 AM),
http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-lapd-discipline-change-20170109-stor
y.html (noting a study which "showed that civilian members of the boards that
weigh major LAPD discipline cases are 'consistently more lenient' than their
sworn counterparts, frequently voting to acquit officers or dole out lesser
punishments").





n248.  Walker, supra note 20, at 3.





n249.  Chemerinsky, supra note 53, at 563.





n250.  Id. at 607.





n251.  Balt. Police Union Memorandum, supra note 160, art. 16(C)(3).





n252.  Walker, supra note 20, at 5 (emphasis removed). Campaign Zero also calls
for eliminating police officer influence from disciplinary boards and setting up
an independent process. See Independent Investigations and Prosecutions,
Campaign Zero, https://www.joincampaignzero. org/investigations
[https://perma.cc/5AFE-J8T4] (last visited Mar. 26, 2017).





n253.  See Walker, supra note 20, at 7.





n254.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9.





n255.  Id.





n256.  See Neil Gross, Opinion, Is There a 'Ferguson Effect'?, N.Y. Times:
Sunday Rev. (Sept. 30, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/opinion/sunday/is-there-a-ferguson-effect.htm
l.





n257.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9.





n258.  42 U.S.C. § 14141 (2012). See generally Armacost, supra note 200, at
525-31; Harmon, supra note 20, at 804-05; Stephen Rushin, Structural Reform
Litigation in American Police Departments, 99 Minn. L. Rev. 1343 (2015).





n259.  See Armacost, supra note 200, at 527-30 (describing DOJ's frequent use of
consent decrees).





n260.  Emmanuel, supra note 147.





n261.  Cienna Madrid, Seattle Police Union Files Lawsuit to Block Police Reform
Plan, Stranger: Slog (Mar. 11, 2013, 3:08 PM),
http://slog.thestranger.com/slog/archives/2013/03/11/seattle-police-union-file-l
awsuit-to-block-police-reform-plan.





n262.  Id. (emphasis removed; ellipses in original). This occurred prior to
Smith taking office in 2014. See infra note 320 and accompanying text.





n263.  Madrid, supra note 261 (emphasis removed). In 2014, a class of union
members, and not the union itself, filed a lawsuit to block the use of force
reforms contained in the DOJ consent decree with the City, contending that the
policies put officers' lives in danger. Steve Miletich et al., Seattle Cops Sue
over DOJ Reforms, Seattle Times (May. 29, 2014, 1:56 PM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/seattle-cops-sue-over-doj-reforms.





n264.  Emmanuel, supra note 147. For instance, the consent decree between the
DOJ and Pittsburgh in 1997 includes the language, "Nothing in this Decree is
intended to alter the collective bargaining agreement between the City and the
Fraternal Order of Police." Id.





n265.  See supra notes 165-73 and accompanying text.





n266.  See, e.g., Agreement by and Between the City of Seattle and Seattle
Police Officers' Guild: Effective Through December 31, 2014 art. 1,
http://www.seattle.gov/personnel/resources/pubs/SPOG.pdf.





n267.  For example, in Houston, with more than five thousand police officers
paying approximately $ 600 a year in union dues, an annual budget would exceed
three million dollars. See Crime in the United States 2012: Table 78, FBI: UCR,
https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2012/crime-in-the-u.s.-2012/tables/78tabled
atadecpdf/table-78-state-cuts/table 78 full time law en forcement employees
texas by city 2012.xls (last visited Mar. 26, 2017) (Houston "Total Law
Enforcement Employees": 6,663); 2015 Union Dues, Houston Police Officers' Union,
http://www.hpou.org/2015-union-dues/ [https://perma.cc/V3A7-P2AG] (last visited
Mar. 26, 2017) (indicating the 2015 total union dues owed is $ 641.04).





n268.  See supra note 193 and accompanying text.





n269.  Ansel Herz, Amid Contract Negotiations, Seattle Police Union Claims It's
"Under Attack" by Black Lives Matter Activists, Stranger: Slog (Dec. 3, 2015,
4:56 PM),
http://www.thestranger.com/blogs/slog/2015/12/03/23230986/amid-contract-negotiat
ions-seattle-police-union-claims-its-under-attack-by-black-lives-matter-activist
s.





n270.  Dominic Holden, Reform in Reverse, Stranger (Apr. 16, 2014),
http://www.thestran ger.com/seattle/reform-in-reverse/Content?oid=19281433.





n271.  Id.





n272.  Herz, supra note 269.





n273.  Id. Ultimately, Bailey was unable to do so because his actions caused a
scandal. See id.





n274.  Holden, supra note 270.





n275.  Id. (ellipsis in original).





n276.  Id.





n277.  S.F. Blue Ribbon Panel, The Blue Ribbon Panel on Transparency,
Accountability, and Fairness in Law Enforcement 1 (2016),
http://sfblueribbonpanel.com/sites/de fault/files/BRP report.pdf [hereinafter
Panel Rep.].





n278.  Id. at 143.





n279.  See supra notes 269-73 and accompanying text.





n280.  Panel Rep., supra note 277, at 143.





n281.  See id.





n282.  See supra Section I.A.





n283.  See Sklansky, supra note 119, at 82 ("The growing power of police unions
made it more difficult for departments to explore new strategies of
collaborative decision making that circumvented seniority systems or bypassed
the union hierarchy."); Jerome H. Skolnick & David H. Bayley, The New Blue Line
160 (1986); Walker, supra note 90, at 380 ("The possibilities for changing
police organizations are limited by structural features such as civil service
and police unions.").





n284.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 211.





n285.  Cf. Max Rivlin-Nadler, Police Union Turns Its Back on Cop Who Killed
Innocent Man in Brooklyn Stairwell, Gothamist (Jan. 28, 2016, 11:17 AM),
http://gothamist.com/2016/01/28/akai gurley liang trial.php (discussing
surprising lack of PBA support at an officer's trial).





n286.  Armacost, supra note 200, at 541.





n287.  Id.





n288.  Id. at 542.





n289.  Id.





n290.  Id. (alteration in original) (quoting William A. Geller & Hans Toch,
Understanding and Controlling Police Abuse of Force, in Police Violence, supra
note 33, at 317).





n291.  See Hans Toch & J. Douglas Grant, Police as Problem Solvers 77-85 (1991),
for an in-depth discussion.





n292.  See Jerome H. Skolnick, Enduring Issues of Police Culture and
Demographics, in Police Reform from the Bottom Up, supra note 27, at 156, 161.





n293.  Id. at 162.





n294.  Id.





n295.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 207 (summarizing the findings of
Toch & Grant, supra note 291, at 77-85).





n296.  Jim Isenberg, Police Leadership in a Democracy 92 (2010).





n297.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 207.





n298.  Id.





n299.  Skolnick & Bayley, supra note 283, at 151-52.





n300.  Toch & Grant, supra note 291, at 85 n.3.





n301.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 208.





n302.  Id.





n303.  Id.





n304.  Id.





n305.  Id.





n306.  Id.





n307.  James J. Fyfe, Training to Reduce Police-Civilian Violence, in Police
Violence supra note 33, at 165, 174.





n308.  Id.





n309.  Id.





n310.  Sklansky, supra note 119, at 183.





n311. " Two years later, the PPL's efforts to oust Parks triggered a
decertification drive by dissent officers supported by the Teamsters; in
response the PPL joined the IUPA." Id. "The PPL had earlier supported
Chemerinsky's successful bid to serve on the Los Angeles Charter Reform
Commission." Id. at 254 n.114.





n312.  Emmanuel, supra note 147.





n313.  Id.





n314.  Id.





n315.  Id.





n316.  Charlie Beck & Connie Rice, How Community Policing Can Work, N.Y. Times
(Aug. 12, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/12/opinion/how-community-policing-can-work.html.
See generally News Release, LAPD, LAPD's Community Safety Partnership Program:
NR15021SF, L.A. Police Dep't (Jan. 22, 2015),
http://www.lapdonline.org/newsroom/news view/57887; Constance Rice & Susan K.
Lee, Advancement Project, Relationship-Based Policing Achieving Safety in Watts,
http://advancementprojectca.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/imce/President's%2
0Task%20Force%20CSP%20Policy%20Brief%20FINAL%2002-27-15.pdf (last visited Mar.
12, 2017).





n317.  See Beck & Rice, supra note 316.





n318.  Id.





n319.  Id.





n320.  See, e.g., Ansel Herz, Seattle Police Union Says Contract Violation
Prevents SPD from Firing Officer Cynthia Whitlatch, Stranger: Slog (Sept. 3,
2015, 3:32 PM), http://www.thestran
ger.com/blogs/slog/2015/09/03/22808730/seattle-police-union-says-contract-violat
ion-prevents-spd-from-firing-officer-cynthia-whitlatch.





n321.  See Steve Miletich, Seattle Police Union President Says He Quit Over
Facebook Post Before His Board Tried to Fire Him, Seattle Times (July 14, 2016,
12:12 AM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/crime/seattle-police-guild-president-sa
ys-he-quit-before-his-board-tried-to-fire-him/.





n322.  See id.





n323.  Ansel Herz, Seattle Police Union President to Cops: Get with the Times or
Get Out of This City, Stranger: Slog (Feb. 18, 2015, 4:05 PM),
http://www.thestranger.com/blogs/slog/2015/02/18/21739167/seattle-police-union-p
resident-to-cops-get-with-the-times-or-get-out-of-this-city (emphasis removed).





n324.  Id.; see also Holden, supra note 270.





n325.  Herz, supra note 269.





n326.  See id.





n327.  Ansel Herz, Inside the City's Negotiations with the Police Union,
Stranger (June 22, 2016),
http://www.thestranger.com/news/2016/06/22/24243759/inside-the-citys-negotiation
s-with-the-police-union/; see also Miletich, supra note 321.





n328.  Steve Miletich & Mike Carter, SPD Faces New Oversight, Scrutiny of Use of
Force, Seattle Times (July 28, 2012, 12:16 AM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/spd-faces-new-oversight-scrutiny-of-use
-of-force/. The purpose of the group is to review the semiannual reports
completed by the court appointed monitor, "hold public meetings, make
recommendations to the city, and engage the community in police reforms. It also
will review recommended changes to the department's civilian-run Office of
Professional Accountability, among other tasks." Id.; see also Community Police
Commission: About Us, Seattle.gov,
http://www.seattle.gov/community-police-commission/about-us (last visited Mar.
26, 2017) (providing more information about the Community Police Commission).





n329.  See David Kroman, Reformers Aren't Celebrating Police Union Leader's
Resignation, Crosscut (July 14, 2016),
http://crosscut.com/2016/07/ron-smith-seattle-police-cpc/.





n330.  David Kroman, Police Unions, Citizen Group Forge Unlikely Partnership,
Crosscut (Feb. 9, 2016),
http://crosscut.com/2016/02/police-citizen-group-forge-unlikely-partnership/.





n331.  Interview with Lisa Daugaard, Co-Chair of the CPC and Director of the
Public Defenders Association (July 14, 2016).





n332.  Kroman, supra note 329.





n333.  Id.





n334.  Id.





n335.  Steve Miletich, SPD Officers Say City 'Playing Politics' with Their
Lives, Seattle Times (Aug. 29, 2014, 8:15 PM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/spd-officers-say-city-lsquoplaying-poli
ticsrsquo-with-their-lives/.





n336.  Kroman, supra note 330.





n337.  Id.





n338.  Id. (alteration in original).





n339.  Id.





n340.  Id.





n341.  Miletich, supra note 321. Over a year earlier, in the December 2014
edition of the union newsletter, Smith accused Barack Obama, Eric Holder, and
Reverend Al Sharpton of carrying out a "divisive political agenda" in response
to Michael Brown's death in Ferguson. See Ansel Herz, SPOG is Still an Obstacle
to Reform at the Seattle Police Department, Stranger: Slog (Dec. 22, 2014, 4:01
PM), http://slog.thestranger.com/slog/archives/2014/12/22/spog-is-still-an-ob
stacle-to-reform-at-the-seattle-police-department (emphasis removed).





n342.  Ansel Herz, Seattle Police Guild President Resigns After Offensive
Facebook Post, Stranger, Slog (July 12, 2016, 9:51 PM),
http://www.thestranger.com/slog/2016/07/12/24337587/seattle-police-guild-preside
nt-resigns.





n343.  Id.





n344.  Miletich, supra note 321.





n345.  Jennifer Sullivan, 'Mellowed' Leader at Helm of SPD Union Reflects on
First Year, Seattle Times (Apr. 16, 2015, 6:28 AM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/mellowed-leader-at-helm-of-spd-union-re
flects-on-first-year/. Smith praised the Chief for being the first in recent
history to work closely with the union. Id. Under past chiefs, he stated, the
union had to file grievances and unfair labor practices claims. Id.





n346.  Id.





n347.  Seattle Police Union Overwhelmingly Rejects Contract Offer, Q13 Fox (July
21, 2016, 3:52 PM),
http://q13fox.com/2016/07/21/seattle-police-officers-union-spog-overwhelmingly-r
e jects-contract-offer/.





n348.  Id. ("An email from the Seattle Police Guild (SPOG) said officers voted
823-156 to reject the proposal. A source told Q13 News that among the sticking
points, two loomed large. The first was that officers oppose involuntary
transfers for non-disciplinary reasons. The second was that officers don't want
civilian investigators in the Office of Professional Accountability, preferring
instead that complaints be handled by sworn officers.").





n349.  Graham A. Rayman, The NYPD Tapes 233 (2013).





n350.  Id.





n351.  Knafo, supra note 106. Interestingly, however, the article never
mentioned the NYPD police union as a source of protection for officers seeking
to challenge harassment of minority communities; officers instead turned to a
civil rights suit against the NYPD. Id.





n352.  Rayman, supra note 349, at 43.





n353.  Id. at 234.





n354.  Id.





n355.  Emmanuel, supra note 147.





n356.  E.g., The Nation, The Hunted and the Hated: An Inside Look at the NYPD's
Stop-and-Frisk Policy, YouTube 1:10 (Oct. 9, 2012),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rWtDMPaRD8.





n357.  Ryan Devereaux, 'We Were Handcuffing Kids for No Reason': Stop-and-Frisk
Goes on Trial, Nation (Mar. 28, 2013),
https://www.thenation.com/article/we-were-handcuffing-kids-no-reason-stop-and-fr
isk-goes-trial/.





n358.  Id. ("Another Bronx police officer, Pedro Serrano ... testified that
failing to meet the precinct's quotas translated in low evaluation marks. From
2010 to 2011, his scores dropped in every evaluation category. In 2012, he
recorded more arrests and summonses, he testified, but his evaluations stayed
the same because he performed only two stop-and-frisks for the entire year.").





n359.  See Skogan, supra note 42, at 149 (describing union resistance to
community policing efforts); Wesley G. Skogan, Community Policing: Common
Impediments to Success, in Community Policing 159, 164 (Lorie Fridell & Mary Ann
Wycoff eds., 2004) (noting that "in a West Coast city, the union protested
strongly against the community policing program (giving it the familiar 'social
work' label) and threatened to keep officers from appearing at training at
all"); Walker, supra note 28, at 92; see also Sklansky, supra note 119, at 156
("The dominant mind-set of police departments, police reformers, appellate
judges, and criminal justice scholars - the dominant mind-set, in short, of
nearly everyone who thinks about policing and its problems - is, and has long
been, that policing is a place for top-down management. Good police officers are
police officers who follow rules. Police unions, and police organizing more
generally, are obstacles, not opportunities.").





n360.  Sklansky, supra note 119, at 55 ("Skolnick ... saw police activism as a
threat to the rule of law: like judges or soldiers, police officers should be
apolitical.") (citing Jerome H. Skolnick, Justice Without Trial 286-88 (1966)).





n361.  See id. at 55 (citing Stephen C. Halpern, Police-Association and
Department Leaders 11-88 (1974)); see also Samuel Walker, Police Accountability
27-29 (2001); Skolnick, supra note 360, at 278-81. For instance, "the 1971 vote
of no confidence in Chief Charles Gain of the Oakland Police Department by the
local Police Officers' Association. Gain was a committed reformer who won the
respect not only of Skolnick but also other scholars who used the Oakland
department for sociological research on the police." Sklansky, supra note 119,
at 217 n.144.





n362.  Sklansky, supra note 119, at 55.





n363.  Sklansky, supra note 40, at 1241; see, e.g., Paoline, supra note 52, at
200 ("Many have asserted that the major barrier to reforming the police is the
[police] culture."); Skogan, supra note 42, at 148-49 (describing union
resistance to community policing efforts in Chicago); Walker, supra note 28, at
95 ("Anecdotally, police chiefs routinely complain that they are unable to
undertake certain innovations because of the police union and the collective
bargaining agreement.").





n364.  Sklansky, supra note 80, at 20; see Manning, supra note 41, at 59 (noting
that discussions of the rank-and-file "have been conflated into a caricature");
Paoline, supra note 52, at 200 ("Most connotations of police culture are
negative."); Report of the New York City Commission to Investigate Allegations
of Police Corruption and the Anti-Corruption Procedures of the Police Department
(1994), reprinted in 6 New York City Police Corruption Investigation
Commissions, 1894-1994, 1, 107 (Gabriel J. Chin ed., 1997) (discussing the
culture of corruption within the organization); Report of the Independent
Commission on the Los Angeles Police Department ix-xii (1991) (documenting a
similar culture of corruption).





n365.  See Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 204.





n366.  Thomas B. Lawrence & Sandra L. Robinson, Ain't Misbehavin: Workplace
Deviance as Organizational Resistance, 33 J. Mgmt. 378, 380 (2007); see also
Mitch Rose, The Seduction of Resistance: Power, Politics, and a Performative
Style of Systems, 20 Env't & Plan. D 383, 387 (2002) (noting that "practices of
'resistance cannot be separated from practices of domination: they are always
entangled in some configuration'").





n367.  See David I. Levine, How Business and Employees Can Both Win: Advantages
and Disadvantages of Employee Involvement, U.C. Berkley: COHRE (Jan. 27, 1999),
http://www.irle.berkeley.edu/cohre/levine/adv.html.





n368.  E. Allan Lind et al., Voice, Control, and Procedural Justice:
Instrumental and Noninstrumental Concerns in Fairness Judgments, 59 J.
Personality & Soc. Psychol. 952, 952 (1990).





n369.  See id. at 953 ("People react quite negatively to ostensibly high voice
procedures when repeated unfavorable outcomes or communications from others
focus attention on possible biases that might subvert the impact of their
voice.").





n370.  Tom R. Tyler, Why People Obey the Law 176 (2006).





n371.  Richard E. Adams et al., Implementing Community-Oriented Policing:
Organizational Change and Street Officer Attitudes, 48 Crime & Delinq. 399,
403-04, 421 (2002).





n372.  Id. at 404 (citations omitted).





n373.  Kelling & Kliesmet, supra note 33, at 210.





n374.  Katherine Beckett, Seattle's Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion Program 4
(2014), http://leadkingcounty.org/lead-evaluation/ (follow "View previous
2014-LEAD Process Evaluation" hyperlink).





n375.  Dan Satterberg, a King County prosecutor, stated that officers will
continue to patrol open air drug markets, "but they will now have ... a
compassionate option and a hopeful option for people who have lost their way."
Millionair Club Charity, Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion (LEAD) Program News
Conference 10/13/2001, YouTube 2:04 (Dec. 9, 2011),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fls4B4V5-1U; see also KingCountyTV, Prosecutor's
Partners - Evergreen Treatment Services, YouTube 4:17 (July 22, 2014),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rxo8qPgQq M ("The officer gives that person a
choice. Do you want to go to jail or do you want to go to LEAD?").





n376.  See LFA Group, Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion (LEAD) Program and
Evaluation Plan Narrative (2011),
http://leadwa.squarespace.com/storage/LFA%20Evalu
ation%20Narrative%20-%20February%202012.pdf.





n377.  Cf. Mark Bevir & Ben Krupicka, Police Reform, Governance, and Democracy,
in Police Occupational Culture, supra note 41, at 153, 173 (discussing top-down
approach).





n378.  See Sara Jean Green, LEAD Program for Low-Level Drug Criminals Sees
Success, Seattle Times (Apr. 9, 2015, 12:00 PM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/crime/lead-pro
gram-for-low-level-drug-criminals-sees-success/; Interview with Lisa Daugaard,
supra note 331.





n379.  See Toch, supra note 54, at 66; see also Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377
, at 173 ("The top-down view of the policy process held by many reformers means
that local police departments and rank and file officers are often only
cursorily consulted about reform programs."); Walker, supra note 28, at 103
("One aspect of the neglect of police unions has been the failure of
accountability advocates to involve union leaders in discussions of reform
measures.").





n380.  See Green, supra note 378 (quoting an author of a LEAD evaluation saying
that the program "looks very promising").





n381.  See Beckett, supra note 374, at 21.





n382.  Id.





n383.  Id.





n384.  Interview with Lisa Daugaard, supra note 331; see also Beckett, supra
note 374, at 21-27; Skogan, supra note 42, at 145.





n385.  See Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 173; see also Skogan, supra note
42, at 147 ("Police are skeptical about programs invented by civilians.").





n386.  See Beckett, supra note 374, at 25.





n387.  See generally id.





n388.  Id. at 2 ("One of the most significant challenges for LEAD stakeholders
in Seattle has been eliciting officer buy-in despite strong support from police
leadership for LEAD.").





n389.  See id. at 5; Innovative LEAD Project Sends Drug Offenders to Services
Instead of Jail, ACLU of Washington (Oct. 13, 2011),
http://www.aclu-wa.org/news/innovative-lead-project-sends-drug-offenders-service
s-instead-jail (noting that LEAD's Policy Coordinating group includes
"representatives from the Seattle Office of the Mayor; King County Executive
Office; Seattle City Council; King County Council; Seattle City Attorney's
Office; King County Prosecuting Attorney's Office; Seattle Police Department;
King County Sheriff's Office; Washington State Department of Corrections;
Belltown LEAD Community Advisory Board; Skyway LEAD Community Advisory Board;
The Defender Association; and the ACLU of Washington").





n390.  Additionally, they had no opportunity to voice their valid concerns such
as whether their new responsibilities would simply be added on to their existing
duties, whether they would be given credit for referring people to treatment,
and whether these new responsibilities would require more paperwork without any
decrease in their existing duties.





n391.  Scott, supra note 77, at 190, 195, 198.





n392.  Beckett, supra note 374, at 22-26.





n393.  Interview with Lisa Daugaard, Director of the Public Defenders
Association (Nov. 18, 2011).





n394.  Id.; see also Beckett, supra note 374, at 25.





n395.  See Beckett, supra note 374, at 22.





n396.  See id. at 23 ("In these groups, too, officers noted that some of their
critiques and suggestions had resulted in concrete changes to the protocol. For
example, [one] sergeant commented that the fact that officers got 'a say' in how
the program would work enhanced police cooperation ... ."); see also id. at 36,
42.





n397.  Green, supra note 378 (discussing study which shows success of the
program).





n398.  See Beckett, supra note 374, at 26-27.





n399.  Id. at 23.





n400.  Id. at 26.





n401.  Id. at 27-28.





n402.  Id. at 43.





n403.  Id. at 26.





n404.  See Scott, supra note 77, at 155.





n405.  See Beckett, supra note 374, at 21-26.





n406.  DOJ Balt. Rep., supra note 13, at 128.





n407.  Id. The DOJ made similar findings in the recent DOJ Chicago Report. See
DOJ Chi. Rep., supra note 10, at 110, 124.





n408.  See W. Dwayne Orrick, Int'l Ass'n of Chiefs of Police, Best Practices
Guide: Developing a Police Department Policy-Procedure Manual 2-3,
http://www.theiacp.org/portals/0/docu ments/pdfs/BP-PolicyProcedures.pdf (last
visited Mar. 29, 2017); see, e.g., Nicole E. Haas et al., Explaining Officer
Compliance: The Importance of Procedural Justice and Trust Inside a Police
Organization, 15 Criminology & Crim. Just. 442, 445, 457 (2015); see also DOJ
Balt. Rep., supra note 13, at 129-30 (finding that BPD does not seek officer
input into policy development with the result that officers find policies to be
"confusing and opaque" and "lack ... confidence in the policy guidance BPD
provides").





n409.  The recent proposal by Professor Rushin proposes greater public
involvement as the major policy reform to address police misconduct. See
generally Rushin, supra note 20. Past experiments with increased public
oversight alone suggest that this reform is likely to encounter substantial
resistance from rank-and-file insufficient to transform police practices absent
dramatic changes in management that will generate trust of the rank-and-file.
What is needed are reforms that garner rank-and-file support so that the
practices are embraced willingly rather than imposed through threat of
discipline and public exposure. The reforms proposed here should be considered
in addition to public involvement, not in lieu of it.





n410.  See supra Section III.A.





n411.  See supra Part II.





n412.  Knafo, supra note 106.





n413.  See Len Levitt, Adrian Schoolcraft: Now It's Getting Serious, Huffington
Post (May 25, 2011),
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/len-levitt/adrian-schoolcraft-now-it b
816281.html; Graham Rayman, Adrian Schoolcraft, NYPD Whistleblower, Gets Law and
Order: SVU Treatment, Village Voice (Oct. 17, 2013, 7:00 AM),
http://www.villagevoice.com/news/adrian-schoolcraft-nypd-whistleblower-gets-law-
and-order-svu-treatment-6687138; Graham Rayman, NYPD Tapes 4: The WhistleBlower,
Adrian Schoolcraft, Village Voice (June 15, 2010, 4:00 AM),
http://www.villagevoice.com/news/nypd-tapes-4-the-whistleblower-adrian-schoolcra
ft-6429143.





n414.  See Abcarian, supra note 64.





n415.  DOJ Balt. Rep., supra note 13, at 4, 17, 131-33, 151.





n416.  DOJ Chi. Rep., supra note 10, at 46-47.





n417.  See Murray Weiss, NYPD Phases Out Programs that Pair Rookie Officers to
Fight Crime, DNAinfo: On the Inside (Feb. 12, 2016, 4:08 PM),
https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20160212/civic-center/nypd-phases-out-programs-
that-pair-rookie-officers-fight-crime.





n418.  Joscha Legewie & Jeffrey Fagan, Group Threat, Police Officer Diversity
and the Deadly Use of Police Force 30 (Columbia Law Sch. Pub. Law & Legal Theory
Working Paper Grp., Paper No. 14-512, 2016).





n419.  Id. at 7-9; see Samuel Walker et al., The Color of Justice 180 (5th ed.
2012); Brad W. Smith, The Impact of Police Officer Diversity on Police-Caused
Homicides, 31 Pol'y Stud. J. 147, 150 (2003).





n420.  Legewie & Fagan, supra note 418, at 32-33.





n421.  See Walker et al., supra note 419, at 180; Sklansky, supra note 80, at
21. See generally Ivan Y. Sun & Brian K. Payne, Racial Differences in Resolving
Conflicts: A Comparison Between Black and White Police Officers, 50 Crime &
Delinq. 516 (2004).





n422.  See, e.g., Martin H. Malin, The Supreme Court and the Duty of Fair
Representation, 27 Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 127, 127-28 (1992).





n423.  The classic work on democracy and oligarchy in union governance is
Seymour Martin Lipset, Martin A. Trow & James S. Coleman, Union Democracy
(1956). A more recent discussion of the anomalous features of union governance
is Cynthia Estlund, Are Unions a Constitutional Anomaly?, 114 Mich. L. Rev. 169
(2015). See also Catherine L. Fisk, Workplace Democracy and Democratic Worker
Organizations: Notes: on Worker Centers, 17 Theoretical Inquiries L. 101,
106-07, 107 n.17, 113-16 (2016) (collecting and discussing other sources).





n424.  See supra notes 341-48 and accompanying text (referencing ouster of
Seattle police union President Smith).





n425.  Karoliszyn, supra note 9 (quoting Tom Nolan, a twenty-seven-year veteran
of the Boston Police Department and current professor of criminology at
Merrimack College).





n426.  See Alan Feuer, Patrick Lynch, Police Union Chief Who Fought de Blasio,
Wins a 5th Term, N.Y. Times (June 5, 2015),
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/06/nyregion/patrick-lynch-re-elected-to-lead-new
-york-police-union.html? r=0; Andres Jauregui, Coalition of NYC Cops Seek Ouster
of 'Arrogant' PBA President Patrick Lynch, Huffington Post (Jan. 21, 2015, 10:24
AM),
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/21/patrick-lynch-nyc-pba-boss-arrogant n
65 15016.html.





n427.  See DiSalvo, supra note 16 (criticizing public sector unions); see also
Summers, supra note 151; Harry H. Wellington & Ralph K. Winter, Jr., The Limits
of Collective Bargaining in Public Employment, 78 Yale L.J. 1107, 1109, 1126
(1969) (proposing that the constitutional nondelegation doctrine limit
collective bargaining over certain public policy matters so that policy will "be
made solely on the basis of the judgment of a designated official"). Even the
staunch defenders of public sector unionism acknowledge the potential for it to
affect the democratic process. See, e.g., Clyde Summers, Public Sector
Bargaining: A Different Animal, 5 U. Pa. J. Lab. & Emp. L. 441, 445-47 (2003).





n428.  See, e.g., Kenneth G. Dau-Schmidt & Mohammad Khan, Undermining or
Promoting Democratic Government? An Economic and Empirical Analysis of the Two
Views of Public Sector Collective Bargaining in American Law, 14 Nev. L.J. 414,
424 (2014).





n429.  See generally Clyde W. Summers, Public Employee Bargaining: A Political
Perspective, 83 Yale L.J. 1156 (1974).





n430.  Id. at 1196.





n431.  See id. at 1197.





n432.  Id. at 1196-97.





n433.  Id. at 1197.





n434.  See Reuben Fischer-Baum & Carl Bialik, Blacks Are Killed by Police at a
Higher Rate in South Carolina and the U.S., FiveThiryEight (Apr. 8, 2015, 7:08
PM), https://fivethirtyeight.
com/datalab/blacks-are-killed-at-a-higher-rate-in-south-carolina-and-the-u-s/;
see also Gary A. Harki, Norfolk Police Have Shot and Killed Twice as Many People
as Any Other Agency in Virginia Since 2010. Why?, Virginian-Pilot: Courts &
Crime (May 1, 2016), http://piloton
line.com/news/local/crime/norfolk-police-have-shot-and-killed-twice-as-many-peop
le/article 7ec 82615-67e3-5668-bfa4-928bdc4a3874.html (discussing police
violence in Virginia); Spirit of Stokes' Comments: Black Life Matters, Too,
Mississippi NAACP (Jan. 7, 2016), http://naacpms.org/category/police-brutality/
(discussing police violence in Mississippi).





n435.  The most thoughtful analysis of the operation of public sector unions in
states that do not recognize public sector bargaining is Ann C. Hodges, Lessons
from the Laboratory: The Polar Opposites on the Public Sector Labor Law
Spectrum, 18 Cornell J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 735 (2009). We have not found a sustained
effort to explain whether or why police misconduct is less pervasive than in
comparable states with unionized police forces in the literature critiquing
police unions and police union contracts.





n436.  Michael Gordon & Jim Morrill, Lingering Anger Over Kerrick Case Boils Up
in N.C. Governor's Race, News & Observer (Aug. 16, 2016, 6:11 PM),
http://www.newsobserver.com/news/politics-government/election/article96030727.ht
ml. The Democratic candidate won the election, though much of the coverage of
the election focused on the Republican governor's support for H.B. 2, a bill
that critics assailed as institutionalizing legal discrimination against LGBT
people. See Richard Fausset, Pat McCrory, North Carolina Governor, Concedes
After Acrimonious Race, N.Y. Times (Dec. 5, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/us/north-car olina-governor.html.





n437.  In Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009), a reverse discrimination
challenge to New Haven's decision to discard the results of tests that had a
disparate impact on Black firefighters' chances for promotion, the firefighters'
union opposed the department's decision to discard the test results. See id. at
641 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). This is another example of how a union can hurt
members of minority groups in ways other than through collective bargaining.





n438.  See Sophia Z. Lee, The Workplace Constitution from the New Deal to the
New Right 2 (2014); Estlund, supra note 423, at 173-74.





n439.  See generally Friedrichs v. Cal. Teachers Ass'n, 136 S. Ct. 1083, 1083
(2016) (per curiam) (affirming by equally divided Court legality of union
opt-out regime); Harris v. Quinn, 134 S. Ct. 2618, 2623 (2014) (holding that the
First Amendment does not permit "a State to compel personal care providers to
subsidize speech on matters of public concern by a union that they do not wish
to join or support").





n440.  Cal. Gov't Code§§3500-3511 (West, Westlaw through Ch. 4 of 2017 Reg.
Sess.). The Winton Act was enacted in 1965 and covered only public school
teachers. The Brown Act, which covered other government employees, operated
slightly differently. The systems are explained in Darrell Johnson, Note: ,
Collective Bargaining and the California Public Teacher, 21 Stan. L. Rev. 340
(1969). They were replaced by four statewide public sector labor laws, including
the MMBA which established collective bargaining rights for county and municipal
employees (including county sheriffs and city police). See generally Joseph R.
Grodin, Public Employee Bargaining in California: The Meyers-Milias-Brown Act in
the Courts, 50 Hastings L.J. 717 (1999).





n441.  Winton Act, 1965 Cal. Stat. 4660.





n442.  See Grodin, supra note 440, at 718-19.





n443.  Johnson, supra note 440, at 355-56.





n444.  Id.





n445.  Id.





n446.  Id. See generally Grodin, supra note 440, at 732.





n447.  Johnson, supra note 440, at 354.





n448.  Id.





n449.  See id.





n450.  See Catherine Fisk, Challenge to 'Fair Share' Union Fees Unfair and
Unworkable, Educ. Wk.: On Cal. (Oct. 6, 2015, 5:12 PM),
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/on california/2015/10/challenge to fair share
union fees unfair and unworkable.html.





n451.  Id.





n452.  See Right to Work States, Nat'l Right to Work: Legal Def. Found.,
http://www.nrtw.org/right-to-work%20states [https://perma.cc/NHV2-GGL7] (last
visited Mar. 29, 2017) (listing the states that have enacted legislation
prohibiting contracts requiring payment of fair share fees).





n453.  See, e.g., Fisk & Sachs, supra note 153, at 858.





n454.  This proposal might look a bit like what has been happening in Missouri
since 2007, when the Missouri Supreme Court declared public employees have a
state constitutional right to bargain collectively even though the state lacks
statutory regimes for union representation and bargaining.  Indep.-Nat'l Educ.
Ass'n v. Indep. Sch. Dist., 223 S.W.3d 131, 133 (Mo. 2007) (en banc). See
generally Malin et al., supra note 19, at 413-56. Some cities have adopted
systems providing for selection of an exclusive bargaining representative chosen
by a majority, as under the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C.§§151-169
(2012). See, e.g., Howard Wright, City Can Establish Rules for Decertification
of Police Union, Missouri Pub. Pol'y & L. (May 24, 2016),
https://momunicipallaw.com/2016/05/24/city-can-establish-rules-for-decertificati
on-of-po lice-union/ (discussing St. Louis Police Department). Some issues
common to other labor law regimes have arisen, including, for example, proposals
to make it more difficult for unions to collect dues from members. See Jason
Hancock, Missouri Republicans Fail to Override Veto of Union Legislation, Kansas
City Star: Buzz (May 13, 2016, 1:19 AM), http://www.kansascity.
com/news/local/news-columns-blogs/the-buzz/article77382392.html. But without a
statewide bargaining law, Missouri would be free to adopt an approach to union
representation and bargaining that departs from the usual majority rule and
exclusive representation regime, although it does not appear that Missouri or
any of its political subdivisions have done so yet.





n455.  See generally Madeline L. Sims, Note: , The Business of Teaching: Can a
New Contract Change the Culture?, 48 Colum. J.L. & Soc. Probs. 605 (2015)
(proposing reforms to teachers' union negotiations, including an expansion of
subjects of bargaining, as a part of school reform, and arguing that outright
elimination of teachers' unions or narrowing the subjects of bargaining will not
improve education).





n456.  See, e.g., U.S. Dep't of Labor, Working Together for Public Service:
Final Report 1-12 (1996),
https://www.dol.gov/dol/aboutdol/history/reich/reports/worktogether/working.
pdf.





n457.  See, e.g., Martin H. Malin, The Paradox of Public Sector Labor Law, 84
Ind. L.J. 1369, 1370 (2009); Joseph E. Slater, The Court Does Not Know "What a
Labor Union Is": How State Structures and Judicial (Mis)constructions Deformed
Public Sector Labor Law, 79 Or. L. Rev. 981, 1032 (2000).





n458.  See Malin, supra note 457, at 1393-94; Charles Taylor Kerchner & Julia E.
Koppich, Organizing Around Quality: The Frontiers of Teacher Unionism, in
Conflicting Missions? Teachers Unions and Educational Reform 281, 290-91 (Tom
Loveless ed., 2000).





n459.  The entity now known as the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection was
formerly known as the Customs Service. See CBP Through the Years, U.S. Customs &
Border Prot., https://www.cbp.gov/about/history [https://perma.cc/6BQ3-YQ8P]
(last visited Mar. 29, 2017).





n460.  U.S. Office of Personnel Mgmt., Labor-management Partnership: A Report to
the President (2000), http://www.opm.gov/lmr/report.





n461.  Malin, supra note 457, at 1396. A variation is the Minnesota law creating
a meet and confer process for professional employees, although it allows for
only a single representative. Minn. Stat. § 179A.08 (2015).





n462.  See Sklansky, supra note 80, at 30.





n463.  See supra Section III.A (discussing Chief Gain and his collaboration with
Hans Toch).





n464.  See, e.g., Michael Selmi & Molly S. McUsic, Difference and Solidarity:
Unions in A Postmodern Age, in Labour Law in an Era of Globalization 429, 433-34
(Joanne Conaghan et al. eds., 2002); see also Marion Crain, Colorblind Unionism,
49 UCLA L. Rev. 1313, 1322-23 (2002); Marion Crain, Whitewashed Labor Law,
Skinwalking Unions, 23 Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L. 211, 224-29 (2002); Marion
Crain & Ken Matheny, "Labor's Divided Ranks": Privilege and the United Front
Ideology, 84 Cornell L. Rev. 1542, 1599-1601 (1999); Ruben J. Garcia, New Voices
at Work: Race and Gender Identity Caucuses in the U.S. Labor Movement, 54
Hastings L.J. 79, 102-12 (2002); Alan Hyde, Employee Caucus: A Key Institution
in the Emerging System of Employment Law, 69 Chi.-Kent. L. Rev. 149, 159-62
(1993); Maria L. Ontiveros, A New Course for Labour Unions: Identity-Based
Organizing as a Response to Globalization, in Labour Law in an Era of
Globalization, supra, at 417, 422-24.





n465.  There are precedents for this. As noted above, in Los Angeles, the police
union partnered with a civil rights lawyer and law professor to investigate the
Rampart scandal precisely because they feared the union and individual officers
would be scapegoated for a larger problem, and other unions have tried to build
bridges to civilian groups to stave off attacks on the union See supra notes
61-63 and accompanying text.





n466.  See discussion supra Section I.C.





n467.  See discussion supra Section IV.B (regarding the nature of the proposal)
and Section II.A (describing police discipline).





n468.  See supra Section I.C.1 (discussing goals for members in collective
bargaining agreements).





n469.  For example, Professor Rushin labels as problematic seven features of
union contracts or statutes, all of which concern the investigation and handling
of discipline: (1) delays in interrogating officers suspected of misconduct; (2)
giving officers access to evidence before interrogation; (3) limiting
consideration of or supervisor access to disciplinary history; (4) limiting
length of interrogation; (5) limits on the investigation of anonymous
complaints; (6) limits on civilian oversight of discipline; and (7) allowing
arbitration of disputed disciplinary sanctions. See Rushin, supra note 20, at
1220 fig.1.





n470.  See discussion supra Section II.A.





n471.  See supra note 145 and accompanying text (civilian review boards); supra
notes 184-86 and accompanying text ("huddling"); supra note 9 and accompanying
text (racial disparities in arrests).





n472.  See Meeting Attendance Rule in Utility Workers Local Disqualifies Reform
Candidates, Ass'n for Union Democracy,
https://uniondemocracy.org/meeting-attendance-rule-in-utility-workers-local-disq
ualifies-reform-candidates/ (last visited May 11, 2017); Nazgol Ghandnoosh,
Organizing Workers Along Ethnic Lines: The Pilipino Workers' Center, in Working
for Justice 49, 55 (Ruth Milkman, Joshua Bloom & Victor Narro eds., 2010)
(noting difficulty of identifying workers and persuading them to take the risk
and time to become involved in a worker organization).





n473.  See The Developing Labor Law 2153-54 (Gwynne A. Wilcox et al. eds., 6th
ed. 2014 & Supp. 2015).





n474.  See generally Malin et al., supra note 19, at 428-50.





n475.  See, e.g., Grodin, supra note 440, at 728 (describing the uncertainty
under the Brown Act as to with whom the public employer was obligated to meet
and confer).





n476.  Act of Mar. 11, 2011, 2011 Wis. Sess. Laws 23; see Wis. Educ. Ass'n
Council v. Walker, 705 F.3d 640, 642 (7th Cir. 2013) (rejecting equal protection
challenge to Act 10's exclusion of some employees from statutory right to
bargain); Madison Teachers, Inc. v. Walker, 851 N.W.2d 337, 347 (Wis. 2014)
(same).





n477.  See Rosenthal, supra note 8, at 693.





n478.  William A. Westley, Violence and the Police: A Sociological Study of Law,
Custom, and Morality xvii (1970); see also George E. Berkley, The Democratic
Policeman 29-39 (1969).





n479.  Bureau of Justice Assistance, U.S. Dep't of Justice, supra note 98, at
25.





n480.  Political scientist William Ker Muir concludes that "an enjoyment of
talk" is a quality of good policemen, because officers who can handle "the
contradiction of achieving just ends with coercive means," can avoid isolation
and add to their "repertoires of potential responses to violence." William K.
Muir, Police: Streetcorner Politicians 4 (1977).





n481.  See Wuestewald & Steinheider, supra note 55, at 54 (noting that
rank-and-file graduates of the Leadership Program gained maturity, were groomed
for leadership such that a disproportionate number have achieved promotions, and
continued to remain "consistently ... more engaged in city and community issues
generally. The communications and interpersonal skills individuals learn and
apply in the process of making collaborative, department-wide decisions has a
maturing affect [sic] on those involved.").





n482.  George L. Kelling et al., supra note 54, at 272 ("Often, management's
attempt to manage culture through command and control merely fosters suspicion,
isolation, insularity, demeaning perception of citizens, grumpiness, the 'blue
curtain,' and cynicism.") (citing Peter K. Manning, Police Work: The Social
Organization of Policing (1979)); see also Edwin Meese III, Community Policing
and the Police Officer, in Community Policing, supra note 41, at 297, 310 ("It
is unlikely that improved communication will occur between police officers and
citizens if effective communication within the department has not been
established first.").





n483.  Wuestewald & Steinheider, supra note 55, at 54 (noting that when shared
leadership was employed in Oklahoma, accepting the decisions made by the group
"were usually vindicated because they proved to be sound choices based on the
firsthand knowledge and insights of those closest to the work").





n484.  Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 171.





n485.  Id. at 172 ("All too often the reformers have not recognized the
particularity of their own narrative, the importance of including actual police
officers in the policy development process, or the variable and open-ended
nature of the cultures and actions within which and to which the reforms will
have to apply.").





n486.  Id. at 171; see also Brown, supra note 60, at 22 (noting that the
"politics of implementation" affect the outcomes of policies).





n487.  Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 171.





n488.  Id. at 170.





n489.  Id. ("Crucially, when the police interpret the reforms, they transform
them, resisting them or domesticating them in ways that have consequences
unforeseen and certainly unintended by the advocates of the reforms.").





n490.  Id. at 171.





n491.  Id.





n492.  Allen, supra note 52, at 94 ("Close supervision and productivity are
negatively correlated.") (citation omitted); Toch, supra note 54, at 63
("Actions inspired by mistrust tend to breed resentment, which fuels obduracy
and resistance. Resistance reinforces suspicion, which incites intrusive
monitoring moves, which breed resentment. And so the cycle continues ... .").





n493.  Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 170.





n494.  Allen, supra note 52, at 93.





n495.  See Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 176 ("Perhaps a more bottom-up
approach to police reform will bring greater success in implementing reforms.").





n496.  See supra Part II.





n497.  See Jonah Berger, Contagious: Why Things Catch On 128 (2013).





n498.  Id.





n499.  See id. at 130.





n500.  As one policing scholar notes, the rank and file "often have important
insights into the impediments to more effective policing... . [They] have a
wealth of unorganized and under-utilizing knowledge about which police
activities are not working and why... . Sadly, this kind of knowledge is not
exploited ... in shaping strategies ... ." Bayley, supra note 48, at 22
(citation omitted); see also Herman Goldstein, The New Policing: Confronting
Complexity, in Community Policing, supra note 41, at 71, 79 ("In rank-and-file
officers, there exists an enormous supply of talent, energy, and commitment
that, under quality leadership, could rapidly transform American policing.").
When shared leadership was employed in Oklahoma, accepting the decisions made by
the group "were usually vindicated because they proved to be sound choices based
on the firsthand knowledge and insights of those closest to the work."
Wuestewald & Steinheider, supra note 55, at 54. Additionally, when "senior
managers doubted a Leadership Team decision ... yet lent their support
regardless, [such instances] became milestones of trust and confidence for the
agency." Id.





n501.  Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 157; see also id. at 170 (noting
that the reforms may not be "a suitable fit with the lived experience of the
officers").





n502.  In this context, as noted above, see supra note 436 and accompanying
text, there is no evidence of less unconstitutional police conduct in
jurisdictions like Virginia and North Carolina that have no public sector
bargaining than in jurisdictions that have it.





n503.  Editorial, Backers of Police Discipline Change Should Be Careful What
They Wish for, L.A. Times (Jan. 11, 2017, 5:00 AM),
http://www.latimes.com/opinion/editorials/la-ed-lapd-board-of-rights-20170111-st
ory.html.





n504.  As Kate Levine argues, the procedural protections that police have
negotiated for in their union contracts or lobbied for in legislation are a
model for how the most troubling aspects of the criminal justice system should
be reformed. Instead of eliminating these protections when police are suspected
of crime, she argues, these protections should be extended to all criminal
suspects. See Levine, supra note 20, at 1202.





n505.  Bevir & Krupicka, supra note 377, at 173 ("Reformers need to do more to
secure prior buy-in from rank and file officers, or the professional
organizations that represent them, if they want the rank and file to have a
sense of ownership over the reforms.").


                               2 of 27 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright (c) 2017 Georgetown Law Journal
                             Georgetown Law Journal

                                   June, 2017

                             Georgetown Law Journal

                               105 Geo. L.J. 1147

LENGTH: 10426 words

ARTICLE: Regulating by Robot: Administrative Decision Making in the
Machine-Learning Era

NAME: CARY COGLIANESE * AND DAVID LEHR **

BIO:



   * Edward B. Shils Professor of Law and Professor of Political Science,
University of Pennsylvania; Director, Penn Program on Regulation. (c) 2017, Cary
Coglianese & David Lehr.


   ** Research Affiliate, Penn Program on Regulation; Yale Law School, J.D.
expected 2020. Research underlying this Article was generously supported by a
grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. For helpful comments and
discussions on an earlier version of this manuscript, we are grateful to Kaiya
Arroyo, Tom Baker, Richard Berk, Tanner Bowen, Ronald Cass, Bryan Choi, Peter
Conti-Brown, Adam Finkel, Claire Finkelstein, Jill Fisch, Josh Gold, Chelsey
Hanson, Kelly Joyce, Joseph Kable, Seth Kreimer, Sandra Mayson, Paul Ohm, Aaron
Roth, Gabriel Scheffler, Shana Starobin, Kenneth Steif, Kristene Unsworth,
Jeffrey Vagle, R. Polk Wagner, Michael Weisberg, Christopher Yoo, and David
Zaring, along with participants in the Regulatory Law and Policy Seminar at the
University of Pennsylvania Law School and the editors of this journal. The views
expressed in this Article are not necessarily those of the individuals or
institutions we gratefully acknowledge here; we alone bear responsibility for
our conclusions.

HIGHLIGHT: Machine-learning algorithms are transforming large segments of the
economy as they fuel innovation in search engines, self-driving cars, product
marketing, and medical imaging, among many other technologies. As machine
learning's use expands across all facets of society, anxiety has emerged about
the intrusion of algorithmic machines into facets of life previously dependent
on human judgment. Alarm bells sounding over the diffusion of artificial
intelligence throughout the private sector only portend greater anxiety about
digital robots replacing humans in the governmental sphere. A few administrative
agencies have already begun to adopt this technology, while others have clear
potential in the near term to use algorithms to shape official decisions over
both rulemaking and adjudication. It is no longer fanciful to envision a future
in which government agencies could effectively make law by robot, a prospect
that understandably conjures up dystopian images of individuals surrendering
their liberty to the control of computerized overlords. Should society be
alarmed by governmental use of machine-learning applications? We examine this
question by considering whether the use of robotic decision tools by government
agencies can pass muster under core, time-honored doctrines of administrative
and constitutional law. At first glance, the idea of algorithmic regulation
might appear to offend one or more traditional doctrines, such as the
nondelegation doctrine, procedural due process, equal protection, or principles
of reason-giving and transparency. We conclude, however, that when
machine-learning technology is properly understood, its use by government
agencies can comfortably fit within these conventional legal parameters. We
recognize, of course, that the legality of regulation by robot is only one
criterion by which its use should be assessed. Agencies should not apply
algorithms cavalierly, even if doing so might not run afoul of the law; in some
cases, safeguards may be needed for machine learning to satisfy broader,
good-governance aspirations. Yet, in contrast with the emerging alarmism, we
resist any categorical dismissal of a future administrative state in which
algorithmic automation guides, and even at times makes, key decisions. Instead,
we urge that governmental reliance on machine learning should be approached with
measured optimism about the potential benefits such technology can offer society
by making government smarter and its decisions more efficient and just.

TEXT:
 [*1149]  INTRODUCTION

   Algorithms are not new. For decades, they have served as integral components
of every computer program.  n1 But today, advanced machine-learning algorithms
are creating a vastly automated society, transforming many facets of life. Many
products and services, including email spam filters,  n2 medical diagnoses,  n3
product marketing,  n4 and self-driving cars,  n5 now depend on machine-learning
algorithms and their ability to deliver astonishing forecasting power and speed.
Today's algorithms are digital "robots"  n6 that possess effectively autonomous
abilities to adapt and learn.  n7 As this type of artificial intelligence
becomes more intricately woven into the economy, a new kind of information
[*1150]  revolution is beginning that may lead to fundamental changes in
society.  n8 The ability of increasingly intelligent systems to replace human
workers, for instance, has prompted widespread concern about the impact of
machine learning on employment opportunities across a variety of occupational
and professional fields.  n9 According to some projections, artificial
intelligence threatens to displace workers in "all routinized jobs and
skill-based jobs that require the ability to perform diverse kinds of
'cognitive' labor, from physicians to reporters to stockbrokers."  n10

   Even more ominously, some commentators worry about potentially new forms of
human oppression that could stem from greater reliance on artificial
intelligence. High-tech entrepreneur Elon Musk, for example, has warned that
artificial intelligence presents the "biggest existential threat" to society,
likening it to "summoning the demon."  n11 Renowned physicist Stephen Hawking
has  [*1151]  eerily forecasted that "[t]he development of full artificial
intelligence could spell the end of the human race."  n12 New York Times
reporter John Markoff summarizes the views of a growing number of observers who
worry that emerging "smart machines" risk constituting a new set of "masters"
controlling humanity.  n13

   These worries about artificial intelligence's impact on human liberty have
surfaced over the use of machine learning by private-sector institutions such as
banks and media companies, but presumably the prospect of governmental reliance
on autonomous, self-learning robots only magnifies any perceived risks of
digital oppression. Machine learning uses by defense, homeland security, and
criminal law enforcement authorities have understandably begun to trigger alarm
and prompt serious ethical consideration. Waging war through robots, for
example, presents obviously novel concerns.  n14 The use of algorithms to
analyze telephone records and other personal information has also sparked
extensive public controversy over privacy issues.  n15 Similar controversies
surround law enforcement agencies' use of machine learning to detect, respond
to, and perhaps even predict crime.  n16

    [*1152]  Notwithstanding the extensive attention given to the use of
machine-learning algorithms by national security and criminal law enforcement
agencies, the use of such artificial intelligence by other governmental
institutions in the day-to-day operation of government has escaped sustained
analysis. Granted, commentators have occasionally speculated about a fanciful
future in which institutions like the Supreme Court  n17 or the presidency  n18
might be replaced by artificial intelligence. But such speculations are usually
intended as absurdities. Most people believe that core governmental institutions
and their decisions must be grounded in judgments made by real human beings: a
"government of the people, by the people."  n19 Even if machine-learning
algorithms come to be widely accepted as substitutes for human control over
automobiles or other functions in private life, a deeper, more fundamental
suspicion about artificial intelligence will presumably remain about the use of
machine learning in the governmental sphere. When it comes to making laws and
other governmental decisions, the notion of using algorithms as substitutes for
human decisions would appear to create a serious threat to democratic
governance, conjuring images of unaccountable, computerized overlords.  n20

   And yet, despite dire warnings about the dangers of runaway algorithmic
governance, many aspects of public administration could undoubtedly benefit from
the application of machine-learning algorithms, both today and in years to come.
The vast work of administrative agencies, with their many routine regulatory
responsibilities and adjudicatory processes, would seem ripe to  [*1153]
benefit from such automation. These agencies fulfill important oversight
responsibilities over vital aspects of everyday life, from regulating the safety
of the food we eat to setting the rules by which financial markets operate.
Officials in these agencies must make an array of crucial judgments on a daily
basis that are not unlike the kinds of judgments that machine learning has so
clearly helped improve in the private sector.  n21 Moreover, with the private
sector increasingly relying on algorithms to make faster, more precise
decisions, the increased speed and complexity of economic activity in the
machine-learning era surely demands that government agencies keep pace and make
use of the same analytic tools in order to regulate the private sector more
effectively.  n22 If machine learning can help regulatory agencies make smarter,
more accurate decisions, the benefits to society could be considerable.

   But can the prospect of the government regulating by robot, or adjudicating
by algorithm, be accommodated within prevailing legal norms? Fitting machine
learning into the regulatory state may turn out to be one of the most
fundamental challenges facing the U.S. governmental system in the decades to
come. Regulating by robot would hardly seem, at first glance, to fit naturally
within prevailing principles of administrative law. That law, after all, is
built on the assumption that governmental decisions will be made by humans. Such
an assumption has led to a variety of legal constraints aimed at ensuring
administrative decisions are democratically accountable and fair. Indeed, even
with humans at the helm, administrative agencies are already thought to
constitute a vast bureaucratic "machinery" of government with an ever-present
potential to grow detached from and unaccountable to the rest of society.  n23
If many bureaucrats' jobs come to be replaced by automated systems, the
likelihood of an even more detached, possibly despotic, administrative
government would only seem to increase.  n24

    [*1154]  When contemplating the use of robotic algorithms, public officials,
lawyers, and judges should ask how well the use of machine learning will conform
to well-established legal principles of constitutional and administrative law.
In this Article, we address significant but previously unanalyzed legal
questions raised by machine learning. In particular, we consider how nonhuman
decision tools would have to be used to comport with the nondelegation doctrine
and with rules about due process, antidiscrimination, and governmental
transparency. Although administrative agencies are still only beginning to use
machine-learning algorithms, today's widespread concern about the robotic
control of other facets of life makes it opportune to examine carefully the
potential for machine learning's use by government agencies.  n25

   Given the relative complexity of modern machine-learning algorithms, we begin
in Part I by providing a brief, non-technical summary of how these algorithms
operate. Drawing on this background, we also identify existing and likely future
applications of machine learning within the administrative state. In Part II, we
provide a legal analysis of such algorithmic applications by federal
administrative agencies, considering whether various methods of implementing
machine learning will likely offend principles of nondelegation, due process,
antidiscrimination, and transparency. We conclude that government agencies
should be able to rely on autonomous, learning decision tools without running
afoul of legal standards. Contrary to popular perceptions, machine learning will
not lead to a runaway government, as a series of technical limitations preclude
a future in which complete regulatory or adjudicatory power can be ceded to
autonomous algorithms over which humans exert little control. When used
thoughtfully, these machine-learning applications should not offend the core
legal foundations of the regulatory state.

    [*1155]  After analyzing the administrative law implications of machine
learning, we step back in Part III to reflect on the policy merits of applying
machine learning to administrative tasks. We do recognize that machine learning
could be implemented irresponsibly in ways that, even though legal, might still
offend more conventional notions of good government.  n26 As with any tool,
artificial intelligence could be misused. And by no means should anyone think
that machine learning constitutes a panacea for government. The use of machine
learning in specific settings and for particular purposes may well prove
inadvisable once all things are considered. The way algorithms are used will
matter too, and at times some safeguards may need to be implemented to ensure
consonance with the broader purposes standing behind the administrative law
doctrines we consider here. In general, though, governmental decision making in
the machine-learning era can and, in appropriate circumstances, should take
advantage of the enhanced public value that can be achieved from regulating by
robot and adjudicating by algorithm. Our detailed examination of the legal
issues and policy tradeoffs leads us to be reasonably optimistic about machine
learning and the instrumental role it can play in making a more promising future
for administrative government.

   I. MACHINE LEARNING AND ITS ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

   Some of the most prominent examples of private-sector growth today--from
Amazon  n27 to Zillow  n28--depend on the use of machine learning to optimize
production processes, supply chains, marketing, and the pricing of goods and
services. Machine learning undergirds future growth across a wide range of
sectors, from the introduction of "fintech" firms in the financial industry  n29
to advances in healthcare delivery via precision medicine.  n30 Machine
learning's main attraction stems from how well it "outperforms human
intelligence."  n31 As  [*1156]  private firms pursue significant efficiency
gains through the kind of smarter and more contextualized decisions made
possible by algorithmic analysis of big data, the government will undoubtedly
need to follow suit, not merely to keep up with new risks these private-sector
uses of machine learning might bring, but also to improve government's ability
to address a host of existing risks and regulatory problems.  n32 Machine
learning promises to make the government, like the private sector, smarter and
more efficient. In this Part, we introduce machine learning and discuss how
government agencies are already beginning to explore its use to optimize
administrative tasks, an endeavor that is likely to grow both in size and scope
in the years ahead. We first explain what machine learning is and describe its
distinguishing features. We then discuss how agencies are already using machine
learning. Finally, we show how this technology could, in the future, potentially
transform the administrative state through what we call "rulemaking by robot"
and "adjudicating by algorithm."

   A. WHAT IS MACHINE LEARNING?

   Fundamentally, machine-learning algorithms are used to make predictions. This
emphasis on prediction contrasts markedly with traditional statistical
techniques which seek to model underlying data-generating processes in the real
world. Although traditional statistical techniques can also generate
predictions, they do so only when the model created by the analyst fits well
with the underlying processes being modeled. These traditional techniques
require the analyst first to specify a mathematical equation expressing an
outcome variable as a function of selected explanatory variables put together in
a particular way, and then to see how well the data fit with the analyst's
choices. For example, when analysts employ the traditional techniques of
ordinary least squares regression or logistic regression, they specify equations
that represent their a priori beliefs about the functional relationships that
exist between independent (or explanatory) and dependent (or outcome) variables.
What regression does, in essence, is estimate the magnitude and direction of
these relationships between the two types of variables that are selected and
specified by the analyst. The relationships in the statistical model ostensibly
represent the relationships in the real world, which is why regression results
are often used to support causal inferences.

   By contrast, machine learning is nonparametric in that it does not require
the researcher to specify any particular functional form of a mathematical model
in advance. Instead, these algorithms allow the data themselves to dictate how
information contained in input variables is put together to forecast the value
of  [*1157]  an output variable.  n33 Machine-learning algorithms do not
generate quite the same kind of information on the magnitude or direction of the
effects that might be associated with any single input variable on the output
variable, controlling for the other variables. The functional relationships in
machine learning are not necessarily the complete set of those in nature's true
data-generating process. As a result, no claim can be made that the
machine-learning process represents any set of true relationships in the world,
and thus none of the causal inferences that typically characterize statistical
modeling can be applied to results of machine learning. In short, with
machine-learning results, causal relationships between inputs and outputs may
simply not exist, no matter how intuitive such relationships might look on the
surface. If a machine-learning algorithm tends to forecast that older
individuals commit fewer crimes than younger individuals, for example, it cannot
be claimed on the basis of the machine-learning process that older age causes
any reduction in the propensity to commit crimes.  n34

   Nevertheless, from a technical standpoint, machine learning's distinctive
predictive and nonparametric focus turns out to be paramount to its impressive
usefulness in generating reliable forecasts. Also of central importance, and
what gives machine learning its name, is how such algorithms mathematically
"learn" to generate their predictions. There are many machine-learning
algorithms that do so in different mathematical ways, but they all attempt, as
one textbook explains, to "optimize a performance criterion using example data
or past experience."  n35 In other words, these algorithms make repeated passes
through data sets, progressively modifying or averaging their predictions to
optimize specified criteria.

   To illustrate this functioning, consider a common application of machine
learning that has proven critical to improvements in the government's handling
of postal mail and other paperwork-processing tasks--the recognition and
classification of handwritten digits.  n36 In this simple application, an
algorithm's performance criterion, or objective function, is classification
accuracy--that is, how often it correctly recognizes, say, a handwritten number
two as a two. To  [*1158]  perform this classification, an algorithm must
"learn" what aspects of a handwritten digit make it likely to be a two. Over the
course of iterative passes through the data, such an algorithm tries to use many
different mathematical descriptions of shapes, as well as relationships of
shapes, in the pictures of handwritten digits to make its classifications. If a
particular descriptive method is optimal, the algorithm will be "rewarded" with
a low error rate; if the descriptions are not optimal, the algorithm will be
"punished" with a high error rate. It can learn, for example, that a handwritten
digit is likely to be a two if the topmost section of the digit depicted is
semicircular and facing downward. Ultimately, the algorithm will seek to make
classifications based on mathematical descriptions of shapes that yield the
lowest error rates.  n37

   This handwriting recognition example provides an illustration of
machine-learning algorithms applied to classification problems, where the goal
is to sort objects into classes. But classification problems represent only some
of the diverse applications of machine-learning techniques. Machine-learning
algorithms can also be used to predict numerical values, such as house prices or
stock market index values--endeavors that are often termed regression problems.
n38 They also can be applied to scenarios, such as playing chess, where an
algorithm can be used to determine the optimal sequence of actions.  n39 Variety
in the types of machine-learning algorithms means that they can be used in a
wide variety of predictive endeavors.

   Admittedly, many "non-learning" techniques have long been used to pursue
these same endeavors. For example, ordinary least squares regression can
estimate numerical outcomes, and logistic regression is commonly used as a
binary classifier. Given the existence of these alternative statistical
techniques, what advantages do machine-learning algorithms offer? Put simply,
they outperform standard procedures in terms of predictive accuracy and
statistical efficiency (that is, the increased ability to obtain predictions
with both low bias and low variance).  n40 Furthermore, many phenomena that
analysts want to forecast  [*1159]  are extraordinarily complex, and analysts
often lack the a priori knowledge necessary to specify an accurately forecasting
conventional model. By eschewing this dependency on existing knowledge and the
need to identify the functional form of any relationships, machine learning can
apply to a wider range of problems and yield vastly enhanced accuracy over its
alternatives, whether human intuition, expert judgment, or traditional
statistical techniques.  n41 Learning algorithms can also adapt more
dynamically; as new data become available, they can search for new patterns and
thereby improve forecasting accuracy.

   Although machine-learning algorithms are known and prized for their accuracy,
this benefit does come at an interpretive cost. This cost is frequently invoked
by references to machine-learning algorithms as "black-box" procedures.  n42 The
black-box nature of machine learning holds important implications for
administrative law, so to understand this feature of machine learning consider
again the classification of handwritten digits. We said that an algorithm might
learn that certain geometric characteristics of the shapes of handwritten digits
are useful for determining which digits they represent--yet we cannot really
know what precise characteristics any machine-learning algorithm is keying in
on. Machine-learning algorithms transform a series of inputs to a series of
outputs by optimizing a performance criterion, but that is where the analyst's
easy ability to interpret the algorithms' workings comes to an end. The user of
an algorithm cannot really discern which particular relationships between
variables factor into the algorithm's classification, or at which point in the
algorithm they do, nor can the user determine how exactly the algorithm puts
together various relationships to yield its classifications.  n43 For this
reason, machine-learning algorithms are often described as transforming inputs
to outputs through a black box. An analyst cannot look inside the black box to
understand how that transformation occurs or describe the relationships with the
same intuitive and causal language often applied to traditional statistical
[*1160]  modeling.  n44

   Despite this interpretive limitation, machine-learning algorithms have been
implemented widely in private-sector settings. Companies desire the savings in
costs and efficiency gleaned from these techniques, and the lack of intuitive
interpretability is of little concern in endeavors where accuracy, not
causality, is the valued metric. Netflix, for instance, employs a form of
machine learning called "artificial neural networks" to suggest entertainment
options to its customers based on their prior viewing habits.  n45 Google uses
machine learning to identify house numbers in its Street View imagery,  n46 to
save energy in its data centers,  n47 and to keep its self-driving cars from
crashing.  n48 Machine learning has also shown great utility in the financial
sector, where it is employed to predict the value of investments and financial
instruments.  n49 The benefits of learning algorithms have also promoted their
adoption in academic research in disciplines closely connected to policymaking,
where predictive accuracy is critical. For example, researchers have shown that
machine-learning algorithms can help predict the propensity of probationers and
parolees to commit violent crimes,  n50 estimate population densities of
homeless persons in cities,  n51 and forecast student retention at universities.
n52 In these ways, both private businesses and academic researchers have
embraced machine learning, and machine-learning applications in a wide variety
of settings are already actively shaping society.

   B. EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATIONS

   For much the same reason that machine learning has been exploited in the
private sector, its use holds potentially great value to government agencies. We
[*1161]  have already noted that national security and law enforcement agencies
are starting to rely on machine learning to support functions as varied as
assessing risks of street crime and automating weapons delivery systems. Outside
the security and law enforcement context, other government agencies have also
begun to explore uses of machine learning, revealing growing recognition of its
promise across a variety of policy settings and at all levels of government.
n53

   Although we mainly focus in this Article on the use of machine learning by
the federal government, the nation's largest cities have received much attention
so far for their embrace of machine learning and its potential to improve
governmental efficiency and effectiveness.  n54 The City of Chicago, for
example, has established an award-winning SmartData Platform initiative through
which city officials are using machine learning to support a range of city
services, from identifying restaurants that should be inspected  n55 to
predicting where and when rodent control bait should be placed throughout the
city.  n56 New York City has established a Mayor's Office of Data Analytics,
n57 which, among other things, is working with the city's fire department to use
machine learning to decide where to send building inspectors.  n58 Flint,
Michigan has partnered with Google and the University of Michigan to address its
recent water crisis by targeting pipe replacements based on machine-learning
predictions of lead contamination.  n59 The City of Los Angeles has installed
sensors in all of its streets that continuously feed data into a
machine-learning system that automatically determines when traffic signals
should turn red or green to optimize traffic  [*1162]  flow.  n60

   At the federal level, one of the earliest domestic applications of machine
learning came from, as we already noted, the U.S. Postal Service's need for a
method to sort mail automatically by predicting the zip codes written on
envelopes.  n61 Meteorologists within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration have explored the use of machine learning to improve forecasts of
severe weather events.  n62 Other federal agencies have also started to rely on
machine learning to support various regulatory and administrative activities.
n63

   Analysts at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), for example, have
developed a program called ToxCast to help the agency predict toxicities of
chemical compounds.  n64 Chemical toxicity has traditionally been established
using animal testing, but these laboratory techniques are costly and time
consuming, not to mention often harmful to animals. Faced with tens of thousands
of chemicals that could be potentially subject to EPA regulation, the agency
developed ToxCast to prioritize which of the multitude of chemicals in
production should undergo more in-depth testing. ToxCast applies
machine-learning algorithms--specifically, linear discriminant analysis--to data
on chemicals' interactions obtained from in vitro testing to predict their
toxicities.  n65 In one  [*1163]  application during ToxCast's first phase,
analysts estimated that using machine learning could save the government $
980,000 per toxic chemical positively identified.  n66 Although the EPA
presently uses ToxCast to identify chemicals for additional testing through more
traditional means, its underlying predictive approach could eventually form an
independent basis for justifying the imposition of regulatory controls.  n67

   The U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has also used machine-learning
algorithms to aid its auditing and enforcement functions. In 2001, it began
developing a "risk-based collection model" that prioritized the IRS's collection
cases for small businesses and self-employed taxpayers by using machine-learning
algorithms, including neural networks, to predict risk of nonpayment.  n68 In
that same year, the agency began to use support vector machines, another type of
machine-learning algorithm, to predict abuse and fraud in tax returns and to
allocate cases for human review based on the probability of abuse and the
magnitude of the dollar amount of the abuse.  n69 More recently, in 2009, the
IRS launched an Information Reporting and Document Matching program, which
applies algorithms to credit card and other third-party data to predict tax
underreporting and non-filing by businesses.  n70 The IRS increased its
requested funding for enforcement targeting from $ 1.4 million in 2012  n71 to
over $ 39 million in 2016,  n72 specifically to develop better ways to use
machine-learning algorithms, including neural networks, to "identify emerging
areas of non-compliance."  n73

    [*1164]  In addition to the EPA's and the IRS's use of machine learning, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has conducted research on the use of
machine-learning techniques to extract information about known equipment
failures, errors, or other adverse events from medical device reports.  n74 This
safety agency is also currently engaged in a five-year collaborative research
agreement with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) focusing on
"artificial intelligence, advanced statistical machine learning and data mining
methods."  n75 MIT researchers have also recently collaborated with researchers
at the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Financial Research (OFR) to
survey methods of evaluating systemic risk in consumer credit markets, including
the use of classification and regression trees.  n76 Separately, academic
researchers have demonstrated how machine-learning algorithms can be used to
predict cases of financial statement fraud,  n77 electoral fraud,  n78 and even
illegal fishing practices.  n79 Agencies like the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) have also taken note
of these new approaches to fraud detection.  n80

   For machine-learning algorithms to work, they depend on accessible and
analyzable data. Toward that end, many agencies are beginning to recognize the
importance of so-called big data--or large volumes of information--in ways
[*1165]  that suggest that the analytical infrastructure needed to use machine
learning more extensively may soon be realized. Officials at the U.S. Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), for example, have recognized that in the service
of aviation safety "there is significantly more potential" for the use of big
data.  n81 The U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has included as
a component of a recent Business Technology Strategic Plan the maturation of
"the back-end disciplines of in-memory analytics, big data, and data quality."
n82 Similarly, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has developed a
Data Innovation Initiative to support the goal of improving its data analytic
capacity.  n83 Throughout the Obama Administration, the White House prioritized
big data use across the executive branch through a Big Data Research and
Development Initiative,  n84 with President Obama's 2016 budget calling for a $
1 billion increase in funding for statistical programs.  n85

   Efforts remain underway not only to create large data sets to support agency
functions but also to make big data more readily analyzable. One example can be
found in the creation of the global Legal Entity Identifier (LEI), a universal
reference code for each entity active in financial markets.  n86 Treasury's OFR
launched an effort to establish LEI in 2010,  n87 and by 2014 the LEI Regulatory
Oversight Committee had assumed operational responsibility for its development.
n88 Having such a unique identifier will enhance regulators' ability "to
identify parties to financial transactions instantly and precisely," allowing
the  [*1166]  authorities to apply machine learning to larger data sets.  n89

   Agencies are also actively working toward development of the cloud storage
systems necessary to exploit the power of machine learning.  n90 Such storage
that takes place via distributed networks of computers proves to be better
suited to running computationally intensive algorithms, and its availability
better facilitates interagency sharing of big data. The FDA, for example, has
leveraged cloud computing to store information on foodborne pathogens, giving
the agency "the ongoing, simultaneous capacity to collect, control and analyze
enormous data sets."  n91 Similarly, the EPA created a Cross-Agency Data
Analytics and Visualization Program intended to foster the creation of databases
that will permit the analysis of data from many different agencies and
organizations.  n92 The SEC is implementing cloud computing to store and process
its one billion daily records of financial market activities, often time-stamped
to the microsecond, allowing the SEC to "perform analyses of thousands of stocks
. . . involving 100 billion records at a time."  n93 The proliferation of such
efforts to capture, share, and analyze vast quantities of data makes it easy to
envision, for example, an extension of the SEC's cloud computing program that
would eventually allow agency computers to monitor trading activities in real
time, predicting in milliseconds whether a financial transaction is the result
of insider trading and then automatically stopping or reversing trades based on
those predictions.  n94

    [*1167]  With these various efforts underway, the government is well on its
way into the era of machine learning. Before turning to the legal implications
of this new era, we next develop more precisely what machine learning portends
for government agencies and why its use might raise questions under prevailing
administrative law doctrines.

   C. ADJUDICATING BY ALGORITHM, RULEMAKING BY ROBOT

   What exactly might be problematic about an era in which government embraces
machine learning? Up to this point in our discussion, perhaps the answer will
not be obvious. Were it not for dire warnings in the popular press of impending
artificially intelligent oppression, it might seem that machine learning simply
represents a more sophisticated, data-rich, and predictively useful version of
the kind of analytic methods that government agencies have long used. If that is
what machine learning is, and if government can use new statistical techniques
to improve its performance of various functions from weather forecasting to
identifying potentially hazardous chemicals, then presumably a machine-learning
era in government should not only be completely unproblematic but also
positively encouraged.

   Three principal properties of machine learning combine, however, to
distinguish it from other analytical techniques and give rise to potential
concerns about the greater reliance on machine learning by governmental
authorities. The first is machine learning's self-learning property. The results
of algorithms do not depend on humans specifying in advance how each variable is
to be factored into the predictions; indeed, as long as learning algorithms are
running, humans are not really controlling how they are combining and comparing
data. These algorithms effectively look for patterns on their own. The second
key property is machine learning's "black box" nature. The results of machine
learning analysis are not intuitively explainable and cannot support causal
explanations of the kind that underlie the reasons traditionally offered to
justify governmental action. Finally, machine learning, as with other
computational strategies in today's digital era, can be fast and automatic,
supporting uses in which the algorithm produces results that can shorten or
potentially bypass human deliberation and decision making. All three of these
factors combine to make machine-learning techniques appear qualitatively more
independent from humans when compared to other statistical techniques.

   To illustrate these features of machine learning and what they portend for
government, consider the challenges the U.S. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA) faces in deciding how to allocate limited
inspection resources to oversee the many thousands of miles of gas, oil, and
chemical pipelines throughout the United States. Major leaks as well as
explosions from leaky pipelines in recent years have made palpable the
significance of effective governmental oversight of pipeline  [*1168]  safety.
n95 In recent years, PHMSA has explored using a traditional regression approach
to predict risks of pipeline accidents and decide how to target the agency's
inspections.  n96 Although such an attempt to engage in quantitative decision
making is certainly laudable, much more efficient inspection targeting could
result if PHMSA generated its risk predictions using machine learning. This
could be possible in the near future once big data sets are shared in real time
between different agencies and information streams could be provided by
remote-sensing technologies. Instead of being limited to analyzing a dozen or so
variables that PHMSA's analysts have predetermined should be included in their
regression analysis, machine-learning algorithms could work their way through
massive amounts of data containing hundreds of potentially predictively useful
variables, ranging from pipeline operators' tax returns to their firms'
workforce diversity. The resulting predictions of pipeline accident risk could
be used not only to target inspections but also potentially, if such an
algorithm could be supplied with real-time data from remote sensors, to order
preemptive shutdowns of pipeline segments that the algorithm predicts are at
risk of imminent failure. To the extent that modern pipeline systems are
equipped with computerized, remote shut-off capabilities, a machine-learning
algorithm could even be programmed to send an automatic order to pipeline
operator's system calling for an immediate, automatic shutdown of a section of
pipeline based on real-time forecasts produced by machine learning, all
potentially without any human intervention.

   Machine learning is well suited for automating these kinds of decisions,
given its emphasis on accuracy and the government's overwhelming need to use its
limited resources to prevent dangers from arising. But notice that a shift to a
machine-learning approach in this context could come along with some qualitative
loss of human involvement. Under machine learning, PHMSA analysts would no
longer predetermine which variables should be included in the agency's risk
models; indeed, they would not even create any risk models at all, in the sense
of building equations specifying exactly how various variables might impact
pipeline risk. Machine learning also does not afford a ready means of explaining
why any section of pipeline should be inspected or shut down. The computerized
nature of machine learning also means that it can automate decisions currently
made by humans, such as the dispatching of inspectors or even the inspections
themselves. It is not difficult to imagine a future in which a  [*1169]
machine-learning system based in PHMSA's headquarters in Washington, D.C. could
be used to automatically dispatch agency drones distributed throughout the
country, having them fly over sections of pipeline to take video images or
collect air quality samples, thereby removing altogether the need to send human
inspectors to the scene.

   Admittedly, even with this potential future scenario in mind, it still might
not be self-evident why machine learning may be problematic. After all, machines
have long supported governmental functions in the administrative state. Although
not flown by drones, machines currently collect air quality samples in a network
of fixed sites around the country, informing state and federal environmental
regulatory decision making.  n97 Moreover, when it comes to inspecting
potentially hazardous sites, eliminating the need for humans to enter high-risk
areas should surely be a positive advance, not a reason for alarm.  n98
Furthermore, decisions about the allocation of inspection resources have long
been treated--as a matter of well-accepted law--as falling entirely within an
agency's discretion.  n99 If agencies can legally allocate inspection resources
by the flip of a coin--that is, sending inspectors to sites at random, as some
agencies do--then they should be able legally to rely on more sophisticated
algorithms that deploy scarce inspection resources automatically but more
efficiently.  n100 For this reason, we foresee comparatively little resistance,
as a matter of law, to applications of machine learning that aim to make more
efficient use of scarce inspection resources.

   Many uses of machine learning by administrative agencies will be like the use
of machine learning to decide where to send inspectors in that they will inform
actions committed to agency discretion. Most of these uses will be unproblematic
from the standpoint of administrative law.  n101 Surely the U.S. Postal
Service's reliance on machine-learning algorithms to sort mail hardly
constitutes any grave threat to society, either existential or constitutional.
In  [*1170]  addition, even when agency officials use learning algorithms to
support actions that are not committed to agency discretion, if they use them
simply to inform their own independent judgments, this too should be
unremarkable. Such use would be indistinguishable from any other research
support or informational input into agency decision making. The non-shaded parts
of Table 1 highlight several general types of agency uses of machine learning
that should easily be viewed as beyond reproach, at least from the standpoint of
existing general principles of structural law governing the administrative
state.

   The domains in which machine learning might be of concern, at least as a
prima facie matter, will be those in which artificial intelligence is used more
for determining, rather than just supporting, decisions that are not otherwise
committed to agency discretion by law. As shown in the shaded portions of Table
1, that leaves two important realms in which machine learning could be
incorporated into the administrative state: adjudicating by algorithm and
rulemaking by robot.  n102

   One example of adjudicating by algorithm would be our posited PHMSA pipeline
safety machine-learning system that automatically issues shut-off orders when
the system forecasts a heightened risk. It is not difficult to imagine  [*1171]
other examples of adjudicatory decisions that could be automated by algorithms,
n103 especially when the relevant criteria for an adjudicatory action are
forward-looking and thus dependent on accurate predictions. At some point, for
example, the FAA might be able to license pilots through an entirely automated
process relying on risk-based machine learning forecasts of individual
applicants' overall level of safety.  n104 The Federal Trade Commission or the
Department of Justice's Antitrust Division might conceivably come to rely on
machine learning to predict what effects a proposed merger would have on future
competition and market pricing, perhaps entirely automating the antitrust review
process.

 Table 1. Applications of Machine Learning in the Administrative State

   When it comes to rulemaking by robot, we need not rely entirely on the
imagination. The City of Los Angeles' current traffic signaling system
illustrates a very simple but still real-world application of rulemaking by
robot. Although deciding the color of traffic lights may seem like a trivial
example, a traffic signal does determine what rule applies to anyone who wants
to drive along a city street at a given period of time. Yet with the system in
place in Los Angeles, just as no human determines when a traffic light should be
red or green, no government official can really explain why the city's
machine-learning system sets any given traffic light (that is, rule) when it
does. We can expect it will not be long before more government authorities, at
the local and federal levels, will be able to develop similar systems in their
own domains that are conceptually equivalent to Los Angeles' traffic control
system.

It is not difficult to imagine more complex and consequential examples of
regulating by robot. Consider the possibility that the SEC might find it
beneficial, even necessary, to govern the world of high-speed electronic trading
by making nimble and equally high-speed adjustments to the rules of market
transactions, perhaps modifying stock exchanges' current, rigid trading circuit
breakers with ones that adjust in real time.  n105 The U.S. Department of the
Treasury, for similar reasons, might plausibly seek to establish a dynamic,
automated process according to which certain macro-prudential rules governing
financial institutions respond to real-time market changes indicative of
systemic  [*1172]  risk.  n106 Even when time is not so critical and the "good
cause" exemption to the standard rulemaking process might not apply, it is
hardly unimaginable today that agencies could automate entirely the
notice-and-comment rulemaking process, especially for the kinds of routine rules
that make up the bulk of government rules.  n107 Natural language processing
programs could even conceivably read and summarize any public comments submitted
on proposed rules and potentially even craft some of the regulatory language.
n108

   For anything but perhaps the simplest rules, like traffic signals, rulemaking
by robot will require that machine learning be combined with other analytic
techniques. Rules are forward-looking, but they also involve complex normative
judgments, not merely predictive ones. Determining the content of rules often
[*1173]  requires making difficult choices about the entities to be regulated,
the conduct or outcome that the rule tells these entities to achieve or avoid,
and the nature and degree of the consequences that follow from adhering or not
adhering to the rule's commands.  n109 Machine-learning algorithms cannot
directly make the choices about these different aspects of a rule's content not
only because some of these choices are normative ones, but also because learning
algorithms are merely predictive and thus unable to overlay causal
interpretations on the relationship between possible regulations and estimated
effects.  n110 The justification for new rules depends, after all, on the
effects that their adoption and implementation are likely to cause.  n111

   Nevertheless, it may be possible for machine learning to make rules in this
fashion when used in conjunction with procedures known as agent-based models
(ABM) or multi-agent systems (MAS).  n112 Agent-based modeling refers to the use
of an algorithm consisting of a mathematically-defined environment that includes
agents that observe the overall environment and take actions designed to reach a
specified goal.  n113 Multi-agent systems are similar to agent-based models but
with multiple autonomous agents interacting with each other.  n114 With either
of these agent-based techniques, the agents--which, in the rulemaking context,
would include the regulator and the regulated entities--must have some defined
decision-making processes that allow them to translate observations of the
environment into actions. These decision-making processes can be specified a
priori by the researcher or regulatory official, but such a priori knowledge
often does not exist or is not sophisticated enough to mimic how real-world
agents make their decisions. Therefore, machine learning--often called
reinforcement learning in these applications (or what we will, for ease of
reference, call "embedded machine learning")--is incorporated into agent-based
models' decision-making processes of individual agents. The mathematical agents
within these systems, in other words, learn how to make decisions.

    [*1174]  To translate these embedded machine-learning techniques to possible
rulemaking applications, consider how the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) might proceed if it were to create an automated process
for determining whether to implement a new workplace safety regulation. OSHA
could implement an algorithm in which the modeled agents are the employers being
regulated. The environment in which these agents operate would include
mathematically-specified factors capable of influencing agent behavior,
including a possible regulation. The employer-agents in the model would
"observe" the environment, which would include different regulatory alternatives
(including an environment with no regulation), and then "take" actions, such as
complying with the regulation, to reach their own goals, perhaps defined as
profit maximization. Now, although OSHA would like to use this agent-based model
to see how employers respond to the potential new regulation and, consequently,
what effects the regulation may have, OSHA does not know a priori how employers
will decide how to respond to any regulation. The agent-based model would
therefore use a machine-learning technique to select employers' optimal
responses to the regulation given their profit maximization goal.

   This example suggests how OSHA might use machine learning embedded within an
agent-based model of the effects of a proposed regulation. But the techniques'
real potential to inform the content of regulations comes from the ability of
OSHA to include an agent representing itself in the ABM. This
mathematically-represented agent would "issue" multiple different possible
regulations--formulated in advance by human programmers--and then "select" the
regulatory alternative that yields those effects, as defined in relation to
observable components of the environment, that maximize an objective function
(or goal) established by the real-world OSHA. The possible regulations analyzed
in this fashion could assume any number of different combinations of regulatory
targets, commands, and consequences, with the forecasted effect of these
regulations on the actions of regulated entities being observed through the
modeling exercise. Unlike in the adjudicatory context, where machine learning
directly makes individualized forecasts and where an adjudication can be
"determined" simply by whether an algorithm forecasts risks or other outcomes
above a threshold level, in the rulemaking context machine learning would need
to be nested within a larger decision-making model to support automated
regulatory decisions. Machine learning predictions would, within an agent-based
simulation, inform agents' actions, which in turn would generate predicted
outcomes from different regulatory permutations.

   This fusion of agent-based or multi-agent models with machine learning may
hold great potential for assisting in certain kinds of rulemaking, but, even
with this fusion, governmental reliance on algorithms would still not cede
entirely the involvement of humans. As already indicated, at a foundational
level, humans will still need to choose and then input into embedded
machine-learning systems the data, as well as overarching goals to be maximized
and  [*1175]  constraints to be minimized. Moreover, due to data limitations as
well as core uncertainties, many rulemaking decisions will still by necessity
call for human judgment and thus be incapable of automation.

   As with any statistical technique, the algorithms that could be embedded in
automated rulemaking models will require data. Because all historical data arise
within a world with a different rule than the one proposed (even if that is no
rule at all), regulators will seldom (if ever) find enough data to correspond to
all possible forms a future regulation and resulting environmental state might
take. This is often a challenge in applications of agent-based models in other
contexts, such as healthcare provision. In those other contexts, the lack of
data is often addressed through the creation of simulated environmental data.
n115 Generation of simulated data, however, requires that the architecture of
the environment being modeled, and the relationships between components of that
environment, be sufficiently well known a priori as to be specifiable. Embedded
machine-learning techniques have been successfully developed for applications
like modeling how infectious patients should be moved around a hospital.  n116
In that context, the environment of interest can be reasonably well specified.
The actors and parameters are limited--for example, healthcare professionals,
infected patients, uninfected patients, and rooms--and the analyst knows a
priori enough about how diseases are transmitted to generate simulated data
using probabilities of infection based on proximity and time spent near infected
patients. This kind of a priori knowledge would seem to be less likely to exist
in the more complex or uncertain situations that many regulators address, where
the relevant causal relationships do not stem from processes as law-like as
biological disease transmission. If the system being modeled is extremely
complex--as with many forms of regulation, whether of complex financial
instruments or advanced industrial operations  n117--the regulator may not know
enough about the underlying causal architecture to generate simulated
environmental data bearing any resemblance to real-world data.

   Of course, despite these difficulties, the conditions for using embedded
machine learning for rulemaking may still sometimes exist. In a comment letter
to the SEC, for example, academic and business experts in agent-based modeling
and financial markets have advocated the use of such models in regulating equity
markets, arguing that algorithms in this context would be sufficiently
specifiable.  n118 Although we take no position on these specific claims, we
raise  [*1176]  them to suggest the plausibility of using embedded machine
learning to automate the process of selecting and designing regulations in some
settings. Agency officials will need to determine the applicability of any
embedded machine-learning rulemaking tool on a case-by-case basis.

   Our point is to show that, even if many applications of machine learning will
be completely benign as a matter of administrative law, agencies may soon be
able, for the first time, to set the content of certain types of rules by
automated artificial intelligence techniques. Whether in making individualized
forecasts or in feeding into more generalized modeling results, machine-learning
algorithms have the potential to transform key governmental functions in ways
that not only augment human judgment but replace it with automated, algorithmic
analysis. For some observers, this prospect will trigger loud alarm bells of the
kind set off by the use of artificial intelligence more generally. At a minimum,
the prospect of either robotic rulemaking or algorithmic adjudication raises
important questions about whether such automated techniques can be squared with
core principles of constitutional and administrative law.

   II. THE LEGALITY OF MACHINE LEARNING IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE STATE

   As government agencies continue on the path toward increased reliance on
machine learning in administrative decision making, public officials, lawyers,
and scholars will confront choices about whether to encourage or constrain this
technology. Making these choices will depend, at least in the first instance, on
assessing how agency use of machine learning would conform to the cornerstones
of constitutional and administrative law: principles of nondelegation, due
process, antidiscrimination, and transparency.  n119 These core legal
principles, against which we assess machine learning in this Part, present
issues that arise from the mathematical distinctiveness of machine learning, in
particular its self-learning, black-box, and automated properties. Especially
when machine learning is used to determine outcomes that are judicially
reviewable, its  [*1177]  properties combine to surface some first-order
questions stemming from a legal system that has been historically premised on
the existence of governmental decision makers who are human beings.

   Our answers to the legal questions presented in this Part must, by necessity,
assume a degree of generality. Machine learning is not a singular entity with
one prescribed method of implementation, so we cannot pretend to offer a
definitive legal analysis of all possible applications of artificial
intelligence in the administrative process. How machine learning will come to be
used in particular contexts, by particular agencies, will no doubt prove pivotal
to determining its legality under certain doctrines. Neither the technique of
machine learning nor its uses are completely uniform--even while sharing general
properties--and even some of those general properties are far from absolute.
Still, learning algorithms do exhibit to a sufficient degree some core features
that make it possible to offer some overarching conclusions. For example, even
though algorithms can learn on their own and support automated decisions, humans
still must decide how algorithms are specified, deployed, and integrated into
broader administrative processes. Machine-learning algorithms are thus
"autonomous" only in the sense that they can run continuously and have the
potential to translate their outputs automatically into regulatory actions.
n120 They do not set their own objective functions nor are they completely
outside human control. An algorithm, by its very definition, must have its
parameters and uses specified by humans, and this property will likely prove
pivotal in the legal assessment of specific applications of artificial
intelligence by federal administrative agencies.

   A. NONDELEGATION

   Military weapons systems driven by algorithms raise serious concerns because,
with these systems, decisions possessing life-and-death consequences may no
longer be made directly by humans.  n121 For similar reasons, concerns could be
raised about administrative agencies' use of artificial intelligence. Although
officials at administrative agencies do not fire missiles, they are responsible
for choices that can carry equally important consequences, such as determining
the safety of food, water, and drugs. If concerns exist over delegating too much
control to non-humans in the military context, then perhaps at least a prima
facie case exists against the use of algorithms to make administrative and
regulatory decisions.

    [*1178]  The U.S. Constitution provides that "[a]ll legislative powers" of
the federal government "shall be vested" in Congress.  n122 Courts have long
accepted that Congress can, within limits, delegate authority to administrative
agencies headed by appointed officers who, although unelected, are overseen in
various ways by members of Congress and the President.  n123 Yet the
nondelegation doctrine, still a fixture in American constitutional and
administrative law, places some theoretical limits on those delegations, which
must, for example, be accompanied by an intelligible principle. Although this
doctrine has long accepted even broad delegations of authority to administrative
agencies, the law has always assumed that the recipient of that authority would
be a human being, such as an officer of the United States or, on occasion, a
private individual or group of individuals. As machine learning becomes more
advanced and government agencies use it more extensively, decision-making
authority could effectively become delegated still further--to computerized
algorithms. Yet if government actions should be undertaken by humans, then
delegation to autonomously learning machines could potentially transfer
governmental power outside the bounds that the Constitution permits. Such an
objection under the nondelegation doctrine has never been squarely contemplated
under previous judicial rulings, but it bears clear conceptual affinity with the
spirit and tradition of the nondelegation doctrine. The underlying concern is
the same: the improper transfer of legislative authority.

   Given that the nondelegation doctrine has traditionally governed the granting
of authority by Congress to agencies, we confront two possible scenarios. The
first assumes that Congress has granted authority to an agency to deploy
machine-learning algorithms to make administrative decisions. The second is a
scenario in which Congress has delegated some kind of administrative authority
to the head of an agency in a conventional manner, but the relevant agency
official then seeks out and relies upon a machine-learning system to exercise
that authority. We will address both of these possible situations in turn, even
though the second scenario might be the one that is more likely to arise in
practice, given that statutes have not been drafted with algorithmic
administration in mind. However, the second scenario raises different, even if
related, questions of statutory interpretation--namely, whether a statute
granting an agency certain governmental authority precludes the agency from
subdelegating its decision making to machine-learning algorithms.  n124 We will
put such a statutory question to the side initially, focusing on the first
scenario, in which Congress delegates authority to agencies to regulate by
robot. This scenario allows us to focus directly on the constitutional question
raised by what Justice  [*1179]  Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar has dubbed the
problem of "cyberdelegation."  n125

1. Cyberdelegation

   The answer to the constitutional question of cyberdelegation should not be
difficult--and not merely because the nondelegation doctrine has been widely
recognized to have had only "one good year."  n126 A congressional authorization
of rulemaking by robot should not offend the nondelegation doctrine because
presumably such an authorization would be made with the understanding that
algorithmic policy determinations depend inherently on well-specified objective
functions. It seems unlikely that any Congress that would expressly contemplate
the use of artificial intelligence by agencies would not also include in
legislation authorizing such use a sufficiently intelligible principle that
would satisfy the demands of the nondelegation doctrine. Under this doctrine,
rulemaking authority can be delegated to agencies only if Congress provides in
its authorizing legislation "an intelligible principle" channeling and
constraining the exercise of that delegated authority.  n127 As every lawyer
today knows, the level of intelligibility demanded by the courts has hardly been
substantial. The courts have recognized that agencies can be delegated power
"under broad general directives"  n128 that facilitate governmental efficacy "in
our increasingly complex society, replete with ever changing and more technical
problems."  n129 As a result, Congress must delegate in ways "delineat[ing] the
general policy, the public agency which is to apply it, and the boundaries of
this delegated authority."  n130 Courts have even upheld delegations of
authority directing, explicitly, only that agencies must act in the "public
interest."  n131

   To say that an intelligible principle must guide agency actions is to say
that those actions must be aligned with a goal or, in mathematical terms, a type
of objective function. An objective function is an essential prerequisite for
the use of machine learning, and it will by necessity provide sufficient
intelligibility to withstand the test embedded in the nondelegation doctrine. If
a goal as broad and qualitative as "acting in the public interest" is legally
sufficient, then goals defined in precise, quantifiable, and measurable ways
must be so as well. A  [*1180]  Congress that deliberately contemplated and
authorized an agency to use machine learning would presumably also understand
the need to provide guidance about the necessary objective function for
algorithms to optimize, and it would be more likely than usual to articulate a
sufficiently clear set of goals that would pass the intelligibility muster.

   What about the recipients of the authority to whom Congress delegates?
Typically, these recipients have been agency officials, but on occasion Congress
has tried to delegate certain kinds of authority to private actors. When
Congress has delegated lawmaking power to private entities, the Supreme Court
has declared such arrangements to be "legislative delegation in its most
obnoxious form."  n132 The Court's disapproval of congressional authorization of
private decision making with legal implications raises a key question about the
possibility of congressional authorization of algorithmic decision making. If
delegating outside the government to the private sector is so disfavored, then
presumably a delegation of rulemaking authority still further--not even to a
human being, but to a machine--would seem more extreme and objectionable.

   We think courts would be unlikely to equate delegation to machines with
delegation to private individuals or entities for three reasons. First,
machine-learning algorithms lack the essence of what makes a delegation to
private individuals so obnoxious--the self-interest of those private parties.
Private parties have their own biases and interests that lead them to make
privately optimal decisions that may not be socially optimal.  n133 By contrast,
what machine-learning algorithms will optimize are the objectives that those
deploying them specify should be optimized. As long as this specification is
done by authorized government officials, the concerns about bias or
self-interest that animate the constitutional prohibition on delegations to the
private sector should not exist.

   Second, even when they rely on machine learning, human governmental officials
will retain ultimate control over the specification of algorithms and the
translation of their outputs to regulatory actions. That the government
maintains such a level of direction and control has made it sufficient for
courts to uphold delegations to private parties. As long as a private party's
participation in rulemaking falls short of possessing the ultimate decisional
control, courts have allowed delegations to the private sector. The Supreme
Court has deemed constitutional, for example, legislation providing industry
with a role in policymaking by a government commission because private firms
only "function[ed]  [*1181]  subordinately to the Commission."  n134 More
generally, the Court has permitted delegation to private parties when their
actions are limited to advisory decisions rather than ones that are binding on
others.  n135

   The kind of rulemaking by robot that we described in section I.C--and even
just the phrase "rulemaking by robot"--might at first glance suggest a role for
machines that exceeds the limits established for delegations to private
entities. Yet even though machine-learning systems are more autonomous from
humans than are conventional statistical techniques, their autonomy is still far
from the constitutionally impermissible kind. Even if rulemaking were to be
fully automated, the underlying algorithms, just to function correctly, must
still be so well specified that important discretion would remain with the human
creators and overseers of the algorithms. As previously discussed, algorithms
could not themselves craft regulatory content de novo; humans must specify the
targets, commands, and consequences of potential rules from which an embedded
machine-learning system might choose the best.  n136 More importantly, humans
can, at any time, choose to reject a machine-chosen rule, alter an algorithm's
specifications, or even "pull the plug" on the system entirely. If nothing else,
as long as rules need to be officially signed or approved by a human official,
then humans will retain ultimate control.  n137

   Finally, although algorithms can act faster than humans--which might imply a
lack of control--ultimately algorithms are mere measurement tools, which the
courts widely accept as legally permissible. The objection, of course, would be
that humans cannot, as a practical matter, exercise meaningful control over
automated rulemaking systems in high-speed settings. In these (and perhaps
other) situations, it may simply not be practical for human officials to monitor
algorithms' output in real time and exercise their abilities to approve or
reject rules or even "pull the plug" on the system. These officials would, of
course, still retain the ability to disable or modify a rulemaking-by-robot
system retroactively. Although it might be reasonable in some circumstances to
demand more than retroactive review, in most instances automated artificial
intelligence systems, once constructed by humans, will typically function as
legally permissible measurement tools.

    [*1182]  In Prometheus Radio Project v. FCC, the FCC relied on a private
company, Arbitron, to measure local radio station audiences, and these
measurements provided critical inputs to rules on station ownership that were
required to serve the public interest, in part, by ensuring competition.  n138
The court ruled that reliance on Arbitron was not an unconstitutional delegation
of legislative power, noting: "Arbitron will only provide a mechanism for
measuring [market] concentration. Because the Commission remains the sole
arbiter of whether a proposed radio station combination serves the public
interest, no improper delegation will occur."  n139 Thus, because the Commission
specified the kind of rule--whether an ownership pattern is legal--and the goal
to be served by the rule--a radio station combination ensuring diversity and
competition sufficient to serve the public interest--private parties were
allowed to control the methods used to measure diversity and competition and
provide measurements that were then translated into rules.

   Analogously, if an agency creates an embedded machine-learning system by
supplying the possible rule options and the objective function, the
implementation of an algorithm that maximizes that objective function and
immediately promulgates the resulting rule should be sustained against
nondelegation objections because it is functionally serving just as a
measurement tool. From the standpoint of the nondelegation doctrine, the use of
machine learning is not conceptually any different than the constitutional use
of other machines or instruments. When FDA officials use measuring devices like
thermometers to determine the optimal temperature at which to store fish, they
are no more delegating impermissibly to those devices than if they were to rely
on machine-learning algorithms.

   For these reasons, not only would legislation authorizing machine-learning
applications be unlikely to offend the intelligible principle requirement, it
also should not constitute a prohibited delegation of authority to an entity
outside of government. Cyberdelegation might well look somewhat novel, but it is
not unlike government reliance on measurement devices and thus unlikely to
exceed constitutional constraints on the delegation of governing authority.

2. Statutory Subdelegation

   Having concluded that congressional authorization of rulemaking by robot is
unlikely to offend the nondelegation doctrine, we return to the issue of
subdelegation. We noted at the outset of this section that the subdelegation
issue involves, in the first instance, answering a statutory interpretation
question. Specifically, would an agency head's reliance on machine-learning
algorithms exceed authority delegated by Congress via statutory language
specifically authorizing "the  [*1183]  Administrator" or "the Secretary" to
act? It should be evident that, for reasons similar to those we have just
presented about delegations to private entities, subdelegations to machines pose
no categorical legal concerns. Administrators do not exceed their statutory
authority by relying on thermometers or other measurement devices. Nor do they
transgress their statutory authority by relying on aides and subordinate
officials because ultimate decision-making authority in such cases is never
completely or irrevocably subdelegated, given administrators' need to endorse,
or their ability to override, what their subordinates do.  n140 The same would
be true of reliance on machine-learning algorithms.

   Despite demonstrating that regulating by robot is unlikely to violate the
nondelegation doctrine, our analysis should not, of course, be taken to imply
that agency actions will never be struck down on grounds related to delegation.
Delegations, for example, may be constrained by how much judicial deference
courts give to agencies' interpretations of ambiguous statutes. Admittedly,
Chevron  n141 deference would appear to be considerable, as courts are generally
instructed to defer to agencies' reasonable interpretations of ambiguous
statutes.  n142 For this reason, we find it difficult to see how an agency's
decision to use machine learning, even if central to an agency's statutory
construction, could rise to the level of unreasonableness typically required for
courts to reject agency interpretations. Nonetheless, given that judges have yet
to face robotic rulemaking processes like those we described in section I.C,
there remains a possibility that they may, in certain situations, view
administrative algorithms with a particular aversion. Furthermore, given what
seems to be a growing currency of arguments that courts have been overly or
inappropriately deferential  [*1184]  to agencies,  n143 the possibility of
future changes in deference standards cannot be overlooked. It is also possible,
of course, for Congress in the future simply to prohibit an agency--or perhaps
all agencies--from subdelegating to automated systems based on machine-learning
algorithms. Despite these future possibilities arising on statutory grounds or
potential changes to the Chevron doctrine, when it comes to the core
constitutional question, we do not foresee delegation considerations posing any
substantial legal hurdle to regulatory applications of machine learning.

   B. DUE PROCESS

   If the prospect of rulemaking by robot might animate concerns about the
nondelegation doctrine, the prospect of adjudicating by algorithm will no doubt
raise due process concerns. Administrative agencies, after all, are expected to
provide adequate procedural due process when taking actions that could deprive
individuals or entities of protected liberty interests or property rights and
entitlements.  n144 These deprivations can occur whenever agencies exercise
their adjudicatory authority, such as when the EPA orders businesses to engage
in the costly cleanup of hazardous waste for which they are deemed responsible
n145 or the Social Security Administration terminates financial payments of
governmental benefits to individuals deemed to be no longer eligible.  n146 In
the machine-learning era, would an agency's reliance on an automated
machine-learning system to make such adjudicatory decisions constitute a
violation of an individual's constitutional right to due process?

   As we noted at the outset of this Part, much will turn on how machine
learning is used and how adjudications by algorithm are conducted.
Machine-learning systems could be used, as discussed in section I.C, simply to
generate inferences that constitute but one of several inputs into an
independent judgment made by human officials. Or they could be used to make
automatic decisions about deprivations of protected rights and interests. This
latter approach, involving automated, algorithmic decisions in adjudicatory
matters, would seem the most likely to deny individuals their due process right
to a  [*1185]  hearing--one of the canonical tenets of procedural due process.
n147 Even so, we will explain why even such machine-learning-based decisions are
in no way uniquely barred from satisfying due process. After reaching this
conclusion, though, we will highlight an area of tension in current case law
that may make it difficult to for agencies to determine when procedural
protections are needed in an age of algorithmic adjudication.

1. Tests for Due Process

   The landmark case of Goldberg v. Kelly is usually recognized for establishing
that due process protections extend to recipients of government welfare
benefits, which previously had been considered privileges that did not afford
the same protection as constitutional rights.  n148 Although Goldberg is often
cited for the Court's rejection of the right--privilege distinction, just as
central to the Court's decision was the importance of welfare recipients having
the ability to appear in person before the government official who makes the
decision about whether to terminate individual benefits.  n149 The Court
rejected a process that was based on written documentation, finding that it was
even insufficient for a human caseworker to present the case on behalf of the
welfare recipient.  n150

   Six years later, in Mathews v. Eldridge, the Supreme Court held that, in the
context of Social Security disability benefits, the government could structure a
process based solely on paperwork review and without offering the recipients of
disability benefits a pre-termination hearing before an administrative official.
n151 The Court did not overturn Goldberg, but instead it offered the
now-canonical balancing test involving three factors that must be weighed in
determining whether due process has been satisfied:


     First, the private interest that will be affected by the official
     action; second, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest
     through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of
     additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and finally, the
     Government's interest, including the function involved and the fiscal
     and administrative burdens that the additional or substitute
     procedural requirement would entail.  n152


 [*1186]  The Mathews Court explicitly noted that, "[d]ue process is flexible
and calls for such procedural protections as the particular situation demands."
n153

   With Mathews balancing now defining procedural due process, we conclude that
algorithmic adjudication would appear to fare suitably well in most instances
(even if Goldberg might still preclude reliance on machine learning in the
context of state welfare benefits). Of course, given that the Mathews standard
calls for balancing, it is impossible to make sweeping generalizations about how
machine-learning algorithms would fare when used by agencies making specific
kinds of decisions. But at least one thing should be clear: No agency should
categorically rule out the use of machine-learning algorithms to support
adjudicatory decisions. Among the areas of the law in which "it depends" would
seem to be the best answer, this is definitely one.

   Mathews's first factor--the private interest at stake--is something entirely
exogenous to machine learning. But the last two factors could very well be
affected, perhaps dramatically so in some cases, by the use of algorithms. When
used to administer extremely large programs, machine learning could save the
government a substantial amount of money by forgoing pre-deprivation hearings,
thereby significantly increasing the weight of the third factor in favor of
machine learning in any due process balancing. It is the second factor, then,
that will likely prove critical in determining the constitutional validity of
automated adjudications--namely, how well machine learning stacks up against
alternative, non-machine-based procedures in terms of avoiding erroneous
deprivations. Agencies will need to be justifiably confident that automatic
algorithmic deprivations have sufficiently low error rates to weigh heavily
against the need for pre-deprivation hearings before human officials. We cannot,
of course, determine ex ante what will constitute sufficiently low rates for all
uses. Given that the nature of a balancing test like that in Mathews requires
case-by-case determinations, we see little reason to write off all adjudicatory
algorithms as unable to conform to due process expectations. On the contrary,
because algorithms can reduce the possible introduction of negative features of
human judgment--such as prejudice, bias, and mistakes--we have reason to expect
that the use of machine learning by government can advance due process values.
n154

2. Evaluating Adjudicatory Algorithms

   When agencies seek to assess the superiority of their machine learning in
terms of error avoidance, the second Mathews factor, two conditions must be met:
(1) error rates truly representing the decision processes' accuracy must be
[*1187]  available, and (2) those error rates must prove to be acceptable in the
overall balance of factors. The first of these two conditions should easily be
met by virtue of machine learning being a purely mathematical decision-making
process. Unlike qualitative methods for determining the factual bases of
deprivations, mathematical classification systems provide estimates of their
error rates before they are actually implemented; one can obtain from
machine-learning algorithms, for instance, a form of output called confusion
tables, which show various error rates in a test data set.  n155 Assuming some
degree of similarity between the test data and the population in which the
algorithms will be implemented, these error rates can be generalized to
real-world adjudications.

   The second condition, an error rate's acceptability, might be determined by
reference to a body of case law that characterizes acceptable error rates for
other types of procedures. Relying on comparisons of error rates associated with
other procedures would be in line with courts' overall emphasis, whenever
possible in applying the Mathews test, on quantitative estimates of error based
on empirical evidence rather than on abstract or hypothetical concepts of risk.
n156 Although due process determinations will still be flexible and require
case-by-case balancing, agencies could reasonably look to precedents about other
procedures to guide their decisions about algorithmic autonomy. If the courts
typically look favorably on conventional procedural mechanisms that have a
certain level of accuracy, then automatic, algorithm-based adjudications with
similar error rates should be likely to pass constitutional muster.

   Looking to precedents will reveal, on the one hand, low error rates that
courts have deemed acceptable. In Mathews, the risk of erroneous deprivation, as
measured by reversals upon appeal, was 3.3 percent,  n157 and the Court noted
that with such a low error rate "[t]he potential value of an evidentiary
hearing, or even oral presentation to the decision maker, is substantially less
in this context than in Goldberg."  n158 Error rates lower than 1 percent have
been similarly treated as acceptable.  n159 In General Electric Co. v. Jackson,
the district court even held that an error rate of 4.4 percent was deemed "an
acceptable rate of error,"  n160 notwithstanding the court's recognition that
"the private[] interest[s] [were] significant."  n161

    [*1188]  At the other end of the continuum, courts have concluded that high
error rates that represent predictions no better, or perhaps even worse, than
guessing by chance are unacceptable and necessitate additional due process
protections to reduce these rates. For example, error rates of 50 percent  n162
and 51.6 percent  n163 have been deemed a "substantial risk,"  n164 and an error
rate of 74.6 percent has been labeled "unacceptably high."  n165

   Between these extremes, court decisions reveal less agreement over the risk
that more moderate error rates pose, and, in some of these cases, the error rate
is not treated as a particularly weighty or controlling balancing factor at all.
An error rate of 30 percent, for example, was deemed to constitute "a very high
error rate for purposes of Mathews v. Eldridge,"  n166 although an 18.96 percent
error rate was considered a "slight"  n167 risk of error, despite, in a
different case, a court treating an error rate of 11.67 percent as a "high risk
of error."  n168 As a result, despite the precision that judicial notice of
error rates to two decimal places might imply, no fixed percentage can be found
in the case law demarcating a clean line between acceptable and unacceptable
levels of error.

   In addition to a lack of a clear, fixed threshold of acceptability, past
precedents present another challenge in that reversal rates are not necessarily
a complete or accurate measure of error. In the particular context of Mathews,
the Court noted that the administrative review system "operated on an open-file
basis,"  n169 meaning that those denied disability benefits could, at any point
following their deprivations, submit new evidence that could result in
additional medical examinations. Individuals who availed themselves of these
procedures to have an initial denial changed were not included in the 3.3
percent reversal rate because their cases were never appealed.  n170 Similarly,
and relevant to measurements in all scenarios, reversal rates may fail to
capture those who are erroneously denied benefits but who choose for various
unrelated reasons not to file an appeal that would lead to an evidentiary
hearing and reversal. For these reasons, the actual rate of "error" in
administrative systems will presumably be higher than indicated by a rate of
reversal.  n171

    [*1189]  These deficiencies in measuring error risk based on reversal rates
may pose a challenge to an agency's search for judicial guidance on automatic
algorithmic deprivations. Algorithms' test-data error rates are mathematically
computed in a way that makes it difficult to compare them directly to the
reversal rates currently relied upon within the case law. Although the case law
seems to indicate that reversal rates under 5 percent should be sufficient to
avoid the need for pre-deprivation hearings, agencies will be unable to
determine ex ante what any particular algorithm's mathematical error rate
equates to in terms of a reversal rate. As a more accurate estimate of the total
error in a system will likely be higher than any reversal rate, an algorithm's
error rate might be higher too, even when reliance on the algorithm actually
results in a less error-prone process. Still, if an algorithm's error rate
itself fell below 5 percent, then agencies relying on the algorithm for
adjudication could presumably predict that the courts would deem this rate to be
acceptable.

   If nothing else, agencies could structure algorithmic adjudication systems to
produce data on reversal rates. By incorporating a delay period between the time
when an algorithmic prediction is made and when any corresponding deprivation of
rights occurs, affected individuals or entities would have the opportunity to
request a hearing, thus generating over time some data on reversals. These delay
periods could accompany a phase-in or piloting of an automated adjudicatory
system, providing agencies with the data needed to establish how their test-data
error rates correspond with reversal rates. As long as these error rates prove
sufficiently low, we anticipate no categorical reason why courts would reject
adjudication by algorithm merely due to its digitized and automated nature.

3. Cross-Examination of Adjudicatory Algorithms

   Perhaps the more substantial due process question presented by automated
adjudication stems from how such a system would affect an aggrieved party's
right to cross-examination. Claimants presumably should have a right to
understand and provide comment on the design of any algorithm, as well as the
underlying data used.  n172 Unfortunately, it will seldom if ever be readily
discern-able why any particular prediction resulted from machine learning, and,
consequently, it will not be easy to determine what evidence would be needed to
[*1190]  rectify errors.  n173 Any of the variables could have been predictively
important ones, and any of those variables could have been the one (or ones)
that contained the error. Probably the only meaningful way to identify errors
would be to conduct a proceeding in which an algorithm and its data are fully
explored. This could be accomplished through agency rulemaking establishing an
automated adjudicatory system in the first place and in specifying the
underlying algorithm's parameters. It might also be raised in individual
hearings or appeals seeking to analyze separately an algorithm's forecast in
each case, probing for sources of error in the data and specifications
underlying those individual predictions.  n174

   Given that this thorough examination of algorithmic error will entail
sophisticated deconstructions of data quality and methodology, few individual
claimants will readily possess the mathematical and analytical ability to
conduct such an investigation without assistance.  n175 Even with the
appointment of counsel, or with a requirement that a hearing examiner
effectively act as counsel, claimants may not be able to receive a fair hearing
about the choices embedded in and the data used by algorithmic adjudication.
Most potential counsel or agency hearing examiners do not possess the necessary
skills to interrogate machine learning systems. An expert must have a good
degree of statistical knowledge to understand how, for example, variables'
importance values are interpreted and what consequences those interpretations
hold for the effects of possible erroneous variable measurements on predictions.
Adjudicating by algorithm may thus necessitate the establishment of a body of
neutral and independent statistical experts to provide oversight and review, or
more likely a prior rulemaking process informed by an expert advisory committee
or subjected to a peer review process. Fortunately, such procedural steps are
well established and have been  [*1191]  long used in other complex
administrative matters.  n176

   In the end, whether any particular algorithmic system will satisfy the
standards of due process will depend on how well that system works and on the
adequate validation of its performance. But nothing in principle stands in the
way of satisfying the demands of due process, even for automated adjudication by
algorithm, especially given the flexibility courts have long granted agencies in
crafting adjudicatory procedures. Furthermore, given the well-established biases
and errors that can creep into human judgment, and recognizing that
machine-learning algorithms have demonstrated superiority over human decisions
in other contexts,  n177 it is reasonable to conclude that agencies will be able
to satisfy the demands of due process even in the machine-learning era.  n178

   C. ANTIDISCRIMINATION

As agencies face choices about how to design machine-learning algorithms in the
service of adjudication and rulemaking, they will need to decide what kinds of
variables should be included in the data these algorithms use to make
predictions. They may have at their disposal data on demographic variables
representing membership in legally protected classes, and inclusion of these
variables in algorithms could increase their predictions' accuracy and
potentially reduce disparities in accuracy across classes.  n179 But including
them, and  [*1192]  then basing action on the resulting predictions, raises
serious concerns about illegal discrimination, especially if those predictions
lead to differential effects on members of a protected class. As a White House
report on big data has warned, "[p]owerful algorithms can unlock value in the
vast troves of information available . . . but also raise the potential of
encoding discrimination in automated decisions."  n180 In this section, we take
up the question of whether inclusion of class-related input variables in federal
agencies' algorithms would render them unconstitutional for equal protection
reasons. We find that, although consideration of suspect class membership is
almost universally struck down for contravening equal protection in traditional
decision-making processes, quantitative or otherwise, some of the unique
attributes of how machine learning operates may shield agencies from a finding
of unconstitutionality. This is not to say that the use of machine-learning
algorithms by federal agencies will always be unproblematic under equal
protection; on the contrary, the use of algorithms could be driven by manifest,
easily-discoverable animus or discriminatory intent as much as any other
decision process. Our suggestion is simply that potential equal protection
challenges to agency use of machine learning will likely face a high bar if
officials in these agencies employ algorithms responsibly and in good faith,
building a suitable record to demonstrate the propriety of their design and use.

   Under the Fifth Amendment, agencies must respect the equal protection rights
of those affected by their actions.  n181 Federal agencies, though, do not
violate those rights "solely because [an action] has a . . . disproportionate
impact" on a protected class, such as race or religion.  n182 Rather, to show a
violation of equal protection by the federal government, "[a] purpose to
discriminate must be present."  n183 In other words, agency action that
purposefully discriminates based on a protected class--that is, action that
engages in disparate  [*1193]  treatment--will be legally suspect and subject to
heightened scrutiny.  n184 At the end of this section, we will briefly suggest
that regulatory decisions made by machine learning could in many instances
withstand heightened scrutiny, but of course we recognize that evaluation under
such a heightened standard of review will ultimately be highly fact-dependent.
Our principal argument in this section is that algorithms that include variables
indicating protected class membership will seldom if ever trigger heightened
scrutiny, at least in the absence of any explicit showing of discriminatory
intent or animus. Equal protection challenges to machine learning will, in
short, likely fail at the first step of analysis that demands a finding that
algorithms that include or analyze class-related variables are intentionally
discriminatory.

1. Suspect Classifications

   Because we assume that there will rarely exist direct evidence that a
decision maker--in this case, an algorithm's programmers or their
superiors--consciously intended to discriminate on the basis of a protected
class, evidence of any such intent would need to be found indirectly and
circumstantially. We will address this kind of search for inferences of
discrimination in the next section, where we explain why machine learning is
unlikely to give rise to such inferences. But first we take up the typical way
that claimants alleging disparate treatment succeed in showing that governmental
action deserves heightened scrutiny: namely, by demonstrating that an agency
action involves a suspect classification. Such classifications are automatically
subject to heightened scrutiny.  n185

   Courts will likely find it difficult to conclude that agency algorithms that
analyze class-related variables entail suspect classifications.  n186 For one
thing, the Supreme Court has never clearly defined what constitutes a suspect
classification.  n187 Its attitude has been relatively consistent when the only
variable  [*1194]  contributing to a governmental decision is membership in a
protected class and where such membership universally leads to disadvantaged
outcomes; such decision schemes are clearly suspect classifications and must be
subjected to heightened scrutiny.  n188 Beyond such manifestly problematic
scenarios, the Court's criteria for suspect classifications have been murkier.
Still, the Court has subjected to heightened scrutiny decision processes in
which membership in a protected class was but one of many variables considered
by government decision makers.  n189 It might therefore be assumed that any
inclusion of class membership, or even the mere consideration of a protected
class, would suffice to conclude that a decision-making process depends on a
suspect classification.  n190 If this were the case, then any machine-learning
algorithm that analyzes data containing variables for membership in a protected
class would surely receive heightened scrutiny. Yet, as others have suggested,
governmental actions that are class-conscious but do not classify on the basis
of group membership may be exempt from heightened scrutiny.  n191 In other
words, government might consider a suspect class without necessarily resulting
in a classification. How class membership is considered, beyond merely the fact
that it is, can matter greatly when it comes to determining if a government
action rests on a suspect classification.

   Previous scholarship has put forward five such aspects of a classification:
"(1) an official government label (2) proclaiming or identifying the [class] of
(3) a particular individual, (4) which is then the basis for allocating benefits
or imposing burdens (5) on the person classified."  n192 The machine-learning
algorithms we envision would certainly contain an official government label
indicating particular individuals' class memberships. It is less clear, however,
that these algorithms would allocate benefits or burdens on the basis of class
membership in the same way as have almost every decision scheme that to date has
been subjected to heightened scrutiny by courts. Decision schemes previously
reviewed by the courts have universally exhibited what we label "categorically
[*1195]  different treatment" based on class membership. In the past, when an
individual's race has been factored into a decision, being a member of a given
race has caused individuals of that race to have their predicted outcomes
affected in a consistently and categorically different way than individuals of
another race. In these situations, being a member of a given race has always
been, across individuals of that race, either advantageous or disadvantageous
when compared to being a member of a different race.  n193 Yet with machine
learning, many, if not most, algorithms will not lead to categorically different
treatment, even when they include consideration of variables for race and other
protected classes.

   Concern about categorically different treatment on the basis of class
membership underlies many Supreme Court decisions under the Equal Protection
Clause. In Gratz v. Bollinger, white undergraduate applicants were categorically
denied twenty points awarded to students belonging to underrepresented minority
groups in a point-based admissions system, resulting in a suspect
classification.  n194 In Grutter v. Bollinger, a law school used a more holistic
admissions process that did not distribute points, but this process was still
deemed a suspect classification; when race did factor into an admissions
decision, membership in an underrepresented minority group was universally given
a degree of preference for admission over lack of such membership.  n195 The
Court has similarly held that heightened scrutiny is warranted due to
categorically different treatment arising from a public school board's method
for determining teacher layoffs that gave preferential treatment to minority
teachers.  n196 Another school district's process of assigning students to
schools triggered heightened scrutiny because, for each school, it gave
preference to students of certain races whose assignment would place the
school's racial makeup closer to that of the school's  [*1196]  district.  n197
In each of these cases, a public decision process treated membership in certain
races as advantageous, while treating membership in others as disadvantageous.

   These are just a few examples, but they demonstrate the pervasiveness of
categorically different treatment of class membership. Traditionally, taking
race or other protected class characteristics into account meant drawing a
distinction that leads to one class being advantaged to some degree over another
class by being more likely to receive benefits or avoid burdens. The Court's
reasoning in its equal protection cases underscores how doctrinally important
this categorically different treatment of class membership is to finding a
reliance on a suspect classification. In Fullilove v. Klutznick, the Supreme
Court applied strict scrutiny precisely because the legislative scheme gave and
withheld "preference based on" ethnic membership.  n198 Similarly, in Wygant v.
Jackson Board of Education, the Court stated that the challenged teacher layoffs
"operate[d] against whites and in favor of certain minorities, and therefore
constitute[d] a classification based on race."  n199 More recently, the Court
emphasized its concern in Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin about a state
"considering racial minority status as a positive or favorable factor in a
university's admissions process."  n200 The Court reasoned that "[t]he principle
of equal protection admits no 'artificial line of a "two-class theory"' that
'permits the recognition of special wards entitled to a degree of protection
greater than that accorded others.'"  n201 In other words, equal protection law
singles out for heightened scrutiny those classifications that arise when
government draws lines that categorically favor some classes and disfavor
others.  n202

   What makes explicit consideration of class membership odious and offensive to
equal protection principles is not just the government officials' consideration
of race and other protected classes, but their use of class status as part of a
classification, when a membership in one class is consistently treated as
advantageous or disadvantageous compared to membership in another class. When it
comes to the use of machine-learning algorithms, however, consideration of class
membership will not necessarily, or even often, give rise to categorically
different treatment. We can expect that most machine-learning applications will
be used to forecast complex phenomena--such as tax fraud or disability
eligibility--that are not easily predicted by standard, less powerful,
statistical techniques. Such complex phenomena are complex precisely because
their causes are not uniform and homogenous across the population. When machine
learning is applied to predict such phenomena, its nonparametric nature and
incorporation  [*1197]  of multidimensional interaction effects allow this
heterogeneity to be manifested--and more fully exploited for predictive benefit.
n203 What this means for equal protection analysis is that if machine-learning
algorithms incorporate an input variable representing individual membership in a
particular class, it is highly unlikely that the effect of that variable on
predicted outcomes will be consistently advantageous or disadvantageous for the
multitude of individuals in that class. Such algorithms will be designed, after
all, to optimize for accuracy in making predictions of fraud or benefits
eligibility, not for giving preferential treatment based on race or other class
characteristics. A learning algorithm will generally be able to improve its
accuracy through more data and additional variables of all types. The forecasts
an algorithm generates will likely support favorable treatment for some members
of a class and unfavorable treatment for other members of that same class, as
these forecasts depend on complex, non-linear interactions of multiple
variables.  n204

   In sum, determining that machine-learning algorithms create a suspect
classification will hardly be a clear-cut task, even when government agencies
include class-related variables in their data sets. Until now, explicit
consideration of individuals' memberships in protected classes has virtually
always been labeled as a classification because of the categorically different
treatment that accompanies such consideration. We recognize that, for this
reason, some courts may instinctually incline toward treating as a suspect
classification the mere consideration of class-related variables by learning
algorithms. Yet what truly makes such consideration a classification, and thus
constitutionally suspect, is the attendant attachment of advantage to one class,
and of disadvantage to another, by the officials who are collecting and
analyzing data in traditional ways--an attachment that will neither necessarily
nor usually be present with the use of machine learning. The courts' heightened
scrutiny of suspect classifications exists not to prevent any and all
governmental considerations of class characteristics. Rather, it exists to
constrain governments from stereotyping and treating individuals as if they were
"defined by" their status within a particular class.  n205  [*1198]  Traditional
schemes, such as admitting minority students or retaining minority teachers,
invariably do stereotype when they categorically assign a different weight in
the government's decision analysis based on class membership. By contrast,
machine-learning algorithms, especially those we have in mind for use in solving
complex forecasting problems, are far less likely to do so. As courts begin to
encounter governmental use of artificial intelligence, they should recognize
that "classification" is not a synonym for explicit consideration of an
individual's class membership  n206 --at least not when applied to learning
algorithms that analyze data that may contain class-related variables.
Machine-learning algorithms do not operate by giving categorically different
treatment based on class membership. As such, absent animus or other explicit
intentionality about class in the selection of optimization parameters, machine
learning's use should not contravene the foundational principles underlying the
Supreme Court's invocation of suspect classifications.

2. Inferring Discriminatory Intent

   Even if algorithms do not implicate suspect classifications, opponents of
certain machine-learning applications might still argue that they should be
subjected to heightened scrutiny by invoking circumstantial evidence to convince
courts to infer discriminatory intent.  n207 Such opponents might claim that the
mere inclusion of a variable such as race in an algorithmic analysis, even if it
does not result in consistently advantageous or disadvantageous predictions,
still demonstrates an a priori intent to give disparate treatment or produce a
disparate outcome. They might argue that conscious decisions by a regulatory
agency to include such variables in a machine-learning analysis represent the
kind of "specific . . . events leading up to the challenged decision"  n208 that
provide circumstantial evidence of discriminatory intent. Whatever surface
appeal such arguments might hold, we think they will almost surely fail. In the
context of machine learning, the black box nature of this analysis means that
the act of including a variable does not by itself provide much insight into
what an algorithm user might have hoped to gain by including that variable;
additional direct or circumstantial evidence would be needed to connect the
inclusion of a variable to discriminatory intent.

   Yet perhaps machine-learning opponents will argue that government officials
should reasonably foresee that the inclusion of variables related to a protected
[*1199]  class could create a disparate impact, and thus officials' persistence
in including those variables evidences intent to discriminate.  n209 Such a
claim would be dubious. Given how machine-learning analysis works on a black-box
basis, it is virtually impossible for anyone to know a priori what a given
variable's likely importance in the algorithm will be or what its ultimate
effects will be on any disparities of predictions.  n210 Many machine-learning
algorithms incorporate stochastic processes that randomly decide if and when a
given variable factors into the classifications, and there are often complex and
unpredictable interaction effects between different variables that may cause the
inclusion of a protected-trait-related variable to decrease, rather than
increase, the disparity of outcomes. Even after an algorithm is implemented, its
black-box nature prevents anyone from determining the effects of that variable
on any resulting disparity of the outcomes--whether it may have worsened or
lessened those disparities.  n211

   Machine-learning opponents might attempt, alternatively, to argue that,
although disparate impacts cannot be expected a priori, a decision maker with
discriminatory intent could run an algorithm multiple times with different
variables included, determine ex post whether including a variable representing
a protected trait produces greater disparity of outcomes, and then choose to
implement an algorithm including such a variable if it produces relatively
greater disparity.  n212 The legitimacy of such a claim, however, is
questionable due to the unknowable generalizability of the outcomes of any
single machinelearning analysis. It is common practice to build an algorithm
using a random sample of an entire data set (called the training data), and to
then evaluate the algorithm's predictions in a different random sample of that
data set (called the test data).  n213 This allows an analyst to obtain some
sense of how the algorithm may perform in new realizations of the data, as
changes may result whenever an algorithm is used in novel predictive endeavors.

    [*1200]  One problem common to any statistical analysis is that the analyst
cannot know how close the test data are to new realizations of data and thus
cannot predict how a model or algorithm will perform in the "real world." If the
entire data set from which the test data were randomly sampled was itself a
random sample from the real world population, then the test data and novel
realizations may well be similar. But it is unlikely, even if an agency is
working with randomly sampled data, for the population from which data are
sampled to be the same population for which generalizations are desired to be
made. Take, for instance, an IRS algorithm used to predict tax fraud. This
algorithm's underlying data may have come from prior years' audits and their
outcomes, but that population is not the same as the population of interest,
which would presumably comprise all individuals filing tax returns--not just
those audited--in the present year. Temporal differences between test data and
real-world data can matter, as differences in the economy between prior years
and the current year may impact the likelihood of individuals to engage in
fraudulent tax practices. Thus, even if an agency analyst were to choose an
algorithm that included a variable representing a protected class, such as race,
a disparate impact is not foreseeable due to the inability of knowing the
likelihood that disparate outcomes observed in test data would be borne out in
real-world data. For these reasons, plaintiffs attempting to show circumstantial
evidence of discriminatory intent in the use of machine learning will surely
face a steep uphill climb.

3. Withstanding Standards of Review

   Thus far, we have explained why administrative agencies' use of
machine-learning algorithms that analyze class-related variables are unlikely to
give rise to heightened scrutiny. Despite a lack of clear, settled judicial
guidance in this area, it seems safe to conclude that learning algorithms'
mathematical properties likely will preclude the courts from labeling the use of
protected-class data in these algorithms as a suspect classification or
inferring any circumstantial discriminatory intent. Yet if a court nevertheless
did subject agencies' machine-learning tools to heightened scrutiny, this does
not automatically mean that courts will find that the agencies have denied
individuals of the equal protection of the law. Whether a decision process
deemed to be discriminatory could survive heightened scrutiny will depend to a
great degree on factors exogenous to the nature of machine
learning--specifically, the nature of the government objective and the state
interest motivating the process.  n214 Presumably, regulatory agencies that use
machine learning in the service of policy objectives such as public health
protection or market stability would have strong arguments that they are seeking
to advance compelling state interests.

    [*1201]  Although a full consideration of how applications of machine
learning would fare under heightened scrutiny will be highly fact dependent,
government should be able to overcome at least one aspect of heightened scrutiny
analysis--the prohibition on "overbroad generalizations" about different
classes.  n215 This specific equal protection concern has been raised in the
context of evidence-based sentencing in which checklists used to inform criminal
sentencing include gender-coding variables weighted on the basis of past
regression analyses.  n216 For example, Sonja Starr has put forward a compelling
argument for why, in that context, inclusion of class-related variables
unconstitutionally capitalizes on overbroad generalizations about class
membership; checklists take gender into account only by assigning uniform
weights to one gender, thereby subjecting all individuals to group-based
treatment instead of treating them truly as individuals, "a core value embodied
by the Equal Protection Clause."  n217 This criticism, though, is unlikely to
carry the same weight in the context of administrative agencies' use of
machine-learning algorithms. If gender, for instance, were included in an
algorithm, it would not be the case that, say, all females would have their
predictions affected in the same way, simply because they were female. Rather,
the effects of gender on the predictions would vary across individuals and would
depend on interactions between the gender variable and all other input
variables, effects that would again be unpredictable and heterogeneous across
individuals.  n218

   Opponents might argue that machine learning nonetheless creates a problematic
statistical generalization of its own because algorithms generate predictions
about what individuals will do based on what similar individuals have done in
the past.  n219 Admittedly, machine learning does rely on analysis of training
data sets; however, such reliance on the past behavior of similar individuals
occurs at a fundamentally different and much more individualized level in the
algorithmic context than in the context of checklists. In the latter,
generalizations are made about what females as a broad group have historically
done. In the former, generalizations will be made about the past behaviors of,
say, females of a certain age, with a certain educational background, living in
a particular area, paying a given amount of taxes, driving a certain type of
car, and so forth. Thus, even though Starr has provided compelling reasons to
believe that checklist generalizations may be unconstitutionally "overbroad,"
the same assertion of excessive breadth will be much less tenable with respect
to machine-learning algorithms.

   We reiterate that challenges to agencies' algorithms will not likely reach
the stage where these considerations will be relevant. The usual rationales for
heightened scrutiny are not likely to apply to machine learning. Accordingly,
the  [*1202]  applicable standard for equal protection purposes will likely be
rational basis review, which "generally results in the validation of state
action."  n220 Rational basis review merely requires that a governmental action
be "rationally related to furthering a legitimate state interest."  n221
Assuming that the governmental interest to which an agency's machine-learning
algorithm is applied is legitimate, it should be quite difficult for that
algorithm to be struck down on equal protection grounds. An algorithm's
objective function will itself provide a concrete, mathematical embodiment of
the agency's goal, sufficient to demonstrate a rational relationship between the
algorithm and the governmental interest at stake.

   One of the few ways in which government actions can be struck down under
rational basis review is through the finding of a motivating animus toward a
certain group.  n222 The Supreme Court has yet to offer clear guidance for
determining the presence of animus or how exactly such a presence should affect
judicial review.  n223 Nevertheless, we can surmise that animus can be found
either through direct evidence or via inference.  n224 Direct evidence typically
takes the form of statements, whether by legislators  n225 or private
individuals whose views are given effect by challenged actions,  n226 showing
sentiments of hostility, stereotype, bias, or bigotry. Such manifest indications
of animus might well surround specific uses of machine-learning algorithms, but
nothing unique about machine learning makes it any more vulnerable to explicit
animus than any other decision-making process or governmental action.

   Claims of indirect inferences of animus might conceivably be advanced by
calling attention to disparate outcomes. Yet, at least with respect to machine
learning, any such inferences would be hard to justify. Although animus has not
been unambiguously defined, inferences of it would likely entail making a
situation-dependent search for some kind of "logical connection" between the
consideration of class and the government interest being served--the absence of
which might plausibly support an inference of animus.  n227 If an algorithm's
supplementary, diagnostic output somehow indicated that a class-related variable
was relatively important for the accuracy of the algorithm's predictions,
[*1203]  then it would appear easy to claim that that variable is connected to a
valid governmental interest--an interest in taking action aimed at a legitimate
purpose in the most efficient and accurate way possible. Alternatively, if a
class-related variable could be shown to be not predictively important, then the
consideration of class would likely not be driving the discrimination complained
of, but rather it would be other, non-class-related variables that would
underlie the outcomes. Opponents of machine learning might argue that these
other variables form, in combination, a proxy for class, and this could be true,
but then the inclusion of those variables would carry the same logical
connection to the government's interest as would the inclusion of important
class-related variables; the non-class-related variables would be contributing
noticeably to the algorithm's accuracy. For these reasons, even when some
evidence might be put forward as to the predictive power of certain variables,
it is unlikely that agencies' algorithms will be particularly vulnerable to
indirect inferences of animus that could lead them to be struck down under
rational basis review.

   Another potential argument opponents might make is that animus arises if an
agency implements an algorithm and finds that it yields vastly disproportionate
outcomes for individuals of a particular class, but then the agency fails to
take any steps to alleviate these disparate outcomes.  n228 After all, a series
of novel statistical methods are emerging that can minimize the disparate impact
of algorithms.  n229 These methods, though, come at the expense of forecasting
accuracy, which means that an agency's failure to adopt them may not necessarily
imply animus. The agency may simply be seeking to ensure that accurate
predictions underlie its actions. Furthermore, any steps an agency might take to
rectify disparate impacts after an algorithm's implementation could itself
constitute unconstitutional disparate treatment.  n230

    [*1204]  Overall, our analysis indicates that agencies seeking to use
machine learning to advance their public missions should not be put off by the
potential for equal protection challenges.  n231 We expect that the courts will
permit these agencies to include class-related variables in their algorithms for
the sake of accuracy and even for trying to mitigate disparate impacts. Although
the inclusion of race and other class characteristics in decision making
supported by machine learning may seem to run afoul of the Court's historical
aversion to explicit considerations of protected classes, we have explained why
the algorithmic consideration of class, unlike the consideration in traditional
decision processes, is unlikely to yield categorically different treatment based
on class membership. Agencies' algorithms are unlikely to be deemed suspect
classifications triggering heightened scrutiny. Due to the distinctive
mathematical properties of machine learning, agencies will also likely escape
heightened scrutiny based on circumstantial evidence of intent. Absent direct
evidence of animus, machine learning should be easily sustained under rational
basis review. Even if subjected to heightened scrutiny, machine learning should,
at least in some settings, also withstand challenge.

   Our conclusions about agencies' ability to use machine learning in ways that
avoid equal protection problems should hardly be construed as giving our
blessing to the careless or indiscriminate use of machine learning. Principles
of good government still necessitate, whenever feasible, the avoidance of
possible discriminatory outcomes, even when such steps are not demanded by the
[*1205]  Constitution. Indeed, one important reason for agency experimentation
with machine learning is to find ways to reduce or eliminate the errors and
biases that creep into human decisions. Although agency officials should be
fully cognizant of potential equal protection objections to their efforts to
engage in algorithmic adjudication or robotic rulemaking, these legal risks
appear quite manageable and should hardly stand in the way of responsible
attempts to use machine learning, especially when doing so will reduce
discrimination that would otherwise be introduced by human decision makers and
their often inescapable, sometimes unconscious, prejudices.  n232

   D. TRANSPARENCY

   Up to this point, we have considered choices that agencies will face when
deciding to implement algorithmic tools. Now we turn to the question of how
could, and should, regulators ensure proper transparency about their choices.
Some observers already fear that an era of artificial intelligence may render
too much of society and its workings opaque.  n233 The legitimacy of agencies'
choices about algorithms will therefore depend on accountability and
transparency.  n234 Principles of transparency undergird much of administrative
law, finding expression in statutes such as the Freedom of Information Act  n235
and various requirements under the Administrative Procedure Act.  n236 Taken
together, these statutes provide a fundamental "means for citizens to know 'what
their Government is up to.'"  n237 The legitimacy of rules issued by
administrative  [*1206]  agencies requires that those being regulated have
access to information showing how and why rules were adopted. Particularly,
transparency requires that agencies ensure that their decisions are "clearly
articulated" and "the rationales for these decisions are fully explained, and
the evidence on which the decisions are based is publicly accessible."  n238

   In the United States, transparency and reason-giving are embedded in a wide
variety of statutory and court-constructed principles. Regulatory agencies must,
for example, allow for public comment on proposed rules, and final rules must be
published in the Federal Register along with a separate statement providing
clear justification of agencies' policy choices.  n239 Agencies also must
generally disclose information to the public upon request,  n240 and agencies
headed by multiple commissioners must generally make their decision-making
meetings open to the public.  n241 All of these requirements have applied
without much interfering with traditional administrative practices, including
those in which qualitative decision processes by humans are supplemented with
conventional quantitative techniques. By contrast, basing regulatory decisions
on machine learning might be viewed by some observers as taking a step backwards
and creating obfuscation because of learning algorithms' complexity and
black-box nature.

   How can the seemingly ineffable qualities of algorithmic analysis be squared
with principles of open government? If an agency decides to adopt a rule because
its machine-learning algorithm "said so," will that by itself constitute
adequate justification when the functioning of the algorithm cannot be
intuitively explained? This section takes up these and related questions. We
conclude that well-informed, responsible use of machine learning can be
compatible with long-established principles of accountable and transparent
administrative decision making, even if some algorithmic components may be
exempt from public disclosure.

   Before delving into our main argument, though, let us briefly confront
head-on any notion that the black-box nature of machine learning necessarily
condemns it as being unlawfully opaque. Although such an initial conclusion
might seem reasonable from the words "black box," such a label is a bit of a
misnomer in this context. To say that machine learning has a black-box nature
does not mean it is completely impenetrable to human examination. Rather, as
discussed in section I.A, it means that machine-learning methods for
transforming inputs to outputs are not as intuitively interpretable as more
traditional forms of data analysis.  n242 This is different than saying that no
one can know at  [*1207]  all how algorithms generate their predictions, which
we would agree would undermine the transparency of any technique underlying
administrative action. Machine learning can be understood and explained.
Analysts can, and do, possess full knowledge of algorithms' inner workings, and
they can mathematically explain how these algorithms optimize their objective
functions. What they lack is simply an interpretive ability to describe this
optimization in conventional, intuitive terms. They cannot say that a
machine-learning analysis shows that X causes Y, and therefore a government
agency aiming to reduce Y needs to regulate X.

1. Reason-Giving

   Legitimacy demands that agencies give adequate reasons for their actions.
With this core principle in mind, the shift in how easy it is to grasp
intuitively the results of machine-learning algorithms might seem to mark an
important qualitative change in how governmental decisions can be explained when
they are based on artificial intelligence. Given the way courts often defer to
agency expertise in cases involving complex scientific and mathematical
analysis, however, decisions that rely on machine learning are unlikely to be
rejected by the courts as insufficiently reasoned.

   To be sure, administrative law has long compelled reason-giving by agency
officials, especially for rulemaking, rendering reasons a cornerstone of an
accountable and transparent government.  n243 The Administrative Procedure Act's
(APA) arbitrary and capricious standard requires an agency to "articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its action, including a 'rational connection
between the facts found and the choice made.'"  n244 In State Farm, the Court
offered what is now the canonical test for arbitrary and capricious review:



     Normally, an agency rule would be arbitrary and capricious if the
     agency has relied on factors which Congress has not intended it to
     consider, entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the
     problem, offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter to
     the evidence before the agency, or is so implausible that it could not
     be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency
     expertise.  n245


To satisfy the standard of reasonableness embedded within the APA, agencies need
to explain clearly "the assumptions and methodology used in preparing the
[*1208]  model" upon which they rely.  n246 When computers implement a model,
courts expect a reasoned explanation to ensure that "ultimate responsibility for
the policy decision remains with the agency rather than the computer."  n247
Thus, in administrative applications of machine learning, agencies will need to
disclose algorithmic specifications, including the objective function being
optimized, the method used for that optimization, and the algorithm's input
variables.

   Under the arbitrary and capricious standard, courts purport to give agencies'
explanations a "substantial inquiry," one that is "thorough" and "probing."
n248 Consequently, some uncertainty, especially in complex rulemakings, may
always exist over whether a court will ultimately find an agency's explanations
satisfactory, and such uncertainty may exist as well when agencies engage in
rulemaking by robot or adjudication by algorithm. Still, courts are usually
deferential to agencies' explanations, especially when they involve complex
expert judgments. A year after State Farm, for example, the Court reviewed a
highly complex rule developed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) in
which the agency effectively assumed that long-term storage of radioactive
wastes would pose no environmental impact. The Court upheld the NRC action,
reasoning that "a reviewing court must remember that the Commission is making
predictions, within its area of special expertise, at the frontiers of science.
When examining this kind of scientific determination, as opposed to simple
findings of fact, a reviewing court must generally be at its most deferential."
n249

   Subsequent lower court decisions have exemplified this degree of deference to
agencies' scientific and mathematical analyses. For example, a district court
recently noted that "[t]he most important thing to remember is that even if
plaintiffs can poke some holes in the agency's models, that does not necessarily
preclude a conclusion that these models are the best available science. Some
degree of predictive error is inherent in the nature of mathematical modeling."
n250 Similarly, another district court involved in a recent review of an
[*1209]  agency's conventional mathematical model noted that, "[w]hile there
seems to be a reasonable difference of opinion regarding whether the model
accurately predicted concentrations of [the chemical at issue], it is not within
the purview of this Court to weigh the evidence supporting these extremely
divergent scientific opinions and decide which of them is correct."  n251 In
these and other cases of dueling arguments over complex models, agency expertise
usually wins out--and will likely continue to do so even as machine learning
becomes the more common source of agency analysis.

2. Disclosure

   In addition to the need to give adequate reasons to withstand arbitrary and
capricious review, agencies confront other norms that reinforce disclosure of
the analysis underlying their decisions. Executive orders on regulatory decision
making impose principles of analysis as well as a process for the review of
significant regulations by the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
(OIRA) within the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).  n252 The Information
Quality Act authorizes the OMB Director to issue guidelines  n253 "for ensuring
and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information
including statistical information disseminated by Federal agencies."  n254 OMB
Circular A-4 offers guidelines for conducting regulatory impact analysis that
request that agencies "clearly document all of the assumptions and methods used
in the analysis, discuss the uncertainties associate[d] with estimates, and
publicly provide the supporting data and underlying analysis."  n255 Similarly,
courts have noted that, "to allow for useful criticism" in the rulemaking
process, "it is especially important for the agency to identify and make
available technical studies and data that it has employed in reaching the
decisions to propose particular rules."  n256

    [*1210]  These standards for disclosure of underlying data and analysis are
hardly absolute. OMB guidelines, for example, recognize that "it may often be
impractical or even impermissible or unethical to apply the reproducibility
standard to [certain] data."  n257 Similarly, the Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) permits agencies to withhold data that constitute trade secrets or
confidential business information  n258 or that are collected or used for law
enforcement purposes.  n259 These exemptions have been successfully invoked to
withhold data underlying rules,  n260 and agencies employing machine learning to
regulate various industries could presumably also lawfully rely on them to
withhold protected data.  n261

   FOIA's exemption for "information compiled for law enforcement purposes"
applies "only to the extent that the production of such law enforcement records
or information . . . would disclose guidelines for law enforcement
investigations or prosecutions if such disclosure could reasonably be expected
to risk circumvention of the law."  n262 Law enforcement in this context
includes regulatory inspections and audits--that is, detection of administrative
violations as well as criminal ones. For agencies engaging in rulemaking via
embedded machine learning, it would be reasonable to imagine they may design an
algorithm to select a regulatory option based in part on the likelihood that
regulated entities will violate it. Accordingly, they may mathematically build
into the machinelearning decision processes of simulated regulated entities a
model of the choice of whether to comply with different regulatory options. Such
a mathematical model would presumably be similar to the enforcement algorithms
that an agency would deploy after a rule's adoption to predict noncompliance
with it. Due to this possibility of subsequently reusing, for a law enforcement
purpose, a component of an embedded machine-learning algorithm that helped
design a rule, agencies may legally seek to exempt from disclosure certain
information about relevant algorithmic specifications used in developing
regulations.  n263

   The FOIA exemption for trade secrets and confidential business information
might also apply when an agency contracts with a private company to implement
[*1211]  machine-learning analysis.  n264 Some of the specific methods that the
private contractor uses for optimizing agents' objective functions in an
embedded machine-learning analysis could constitute a trade secret, reflecting
the mathematical innovation produced by the firm. Of course, the objective
functions themselves could still be disclosed, as they would reflect the goals
of the agency and perhaps the agency's assumption of the goals of regulated
entities. What the private contractor working for the agency may possess
expertise in, however, is the derivation of novel mathematical methods of
optimizing those objective functions. Indeed, what made the machine-learning
procedure known as "random forests" truly innovative is not what it maximizes,
but how it does so. When this procedure is applied to predict the mean of a
quantitative variable, its objective (or loss) function is mathematically
identical to that of an ordinary least squares regression.  n265 But the unique
methods for optimizing that loss function result from years of research. Similar
methods developed by private firms and applied to particular governmental loss
functions can easily be repurposed to optimize other loss functions in a way
that furthers the production of a trade commodity, thereby rendering those
optimization processes "information relating to the 'productive process'
itself,"  n266 and thus protected from disclosure under FOIA. If these
optimization processes are withheld but the objective functions being optimized
are disclosed, it will be possible for the public to know the "why" but not
necessarily or fully the "how" of the agencies' underlying analyses. Rules could
be adopted because the analysis shows that their modeled consequences result in
maximization of an agency's goals, but how exactly that maximization was
computed could remain undisclosed.

In these ways, when agencies attempt to exploit the predictive benefits of
machine learning, they may rely on methods that can protect some information
from disclosure. But these practices and the resulting limits on disclosure
associated with them are hardly unique or distinctive to machine learning, even
if arguably they might become more prevalent with the routine use of machine
learning.

   Agencies would do well when using algorithms to follow good supplementary
disclosure practices, even if they are not compelled to do so. One such practice
would be the disclosure of all iterations of an algorithm or alternative
algorithms that were considered, their predictions, and their corresponding
specifications (assuming that those specifications are not exempt from
disclosure). The end goal of an algorithm is accurate prediction via
optimization of an objective function; determining which algorithm and
specifications yield the most accurate predictions is often a matter of trial
and error. Various algorithms  [*1212]  perform differently in data sets, and a
whole host of factors can affect their accuracy, including how many times an
algorithm is run before compiling results from all runs, what variables are
included in the algorithm, and other tuning parameters that vary depending on
the algorithm. In other words, the road to a final algorithm is paved with many
others whose results ultimately inform properties of the final algorithm.
Disclosing the earlier runs would be advisable because they would indicate that
the ultimate methodology was chosen wisely and with consideration of possible
alternatives.  n267 Volunteering how those previous algorithms were specified
and tuned should not reveal information that needs to be exempted from
disclosure, and yet it would give some insights into agencies' deliberative
processes. Perhaps more importantly, it would signal the adoption of "a
presumption in favor of disclosure" that exemplifies good governmental practice.
n268

   Agencies could also generate and release additional forms of algorithmic
output that reveal information about the structural properties of data sets and
the relationships among variables without disclosing exempted information. Such
outputs might include, for example, "partial dependence plots," which reveal the
functional forms of relationships (albeit with no implication of causality)
between predictor variables and the outcome variable, as well as "predictor
importance plots," which indicate, roughly speaking, how important each
predictor variable is for resulting predictions.  n269 Such plots are tangential
to the metric that is key to policymaking based on algorithms--predictive
accuracy--and thus they are not likely to factor into rules in any dispositive
way that would make them legally subject to disclosure. But they can offer
supplementary commentary that would further transparency by allowing interested
parties to accrue some knowledge of information contained in withheld data sets
or algorithms. Perhaps more importantly, output such as partial dependence plots
n270 might provide some more intuitive explanations as to why an algorithm's
predictions resulted, which may be valuable to courts or members of the public
accustomed to decisions based on causal reasoning.  n271

    [*1213]  Ultimately, transparency in administrative rulemaking is essential
to avoid the creation of "secret law"  n272 and to "ensure an informed
citizenry, vital to the functioning of a democratic society, needed to check
against corruption and to hold the governors accountable to the governed."  n273
When regulations are made based on algorithmic predictions, transparency of
decision making requires as much disclosure about the algorithm's specifications
and its underlying data as possible.  n274 However, as noted, FOIA may often
allow the withholding of some data on commercial confidentiality or related
grounds, rendering complete reproducibility of results difficult. But, if
algorithmic specifications can be disclosed so as to make results at least
theoretically reproducible, then the fundamental goal of knowing how and why
decisions resulted might be satisfied. Of course, those specifications
themselves, in particular the mathematical optimization processes used in a
machine-learning analysis, could be exempted from disclosure as well if they
support law enforcement or are developed by private contractors. But these are
all legally permissible exemptions that have been invoked by agencies time and
again outside the context of algorithmic regulation. As agencies move into the
era of machine learning, they may continue to avail themselves of these same
exemptions but would still be required or at least advised to release an
appropriate amount of information to illuminate what may initially seem to be an
opaque analytical process and satisfy prevailing norms of open government. In
these ways, agencies will also be able to justify their actions with sufficient
reasons to withstand charges that agencies have acted in an arbitrary or
capricious manner.

   III. THE MERITS OF MACHINE LEARNING IN THE REGULATORY STATE

   The legal analysis presented in the previous Part indicates that when federal
agencies use artificial intelligence to automate regulatory and adjudicatory
decisions, they will likely face little difficulty in making machine-learning
practices fit within existing administrative and constitutional constraints.
n275 This analysis has taken place against a backdrop of growing concern over
the proliferation of machine learning and artificial intelligence, which may
make our conclusions surprising, if not a bit disquieting, to some readers.
After all, as we noted at the outset of this Article, technologists and
sociologists alike worry  [*1214]  about the consequences of algorithmic
automation spreading throughout society, bringing with it the possibility that
highly-skilled jobs will be taken over by machines  n276 as super-intelligent
computers surpass the capacities of humans.  n277 These anxieties will
undoubtedly grow only more fevered when artificial intelligence falls into the
hands of government officials, such as when it is used in predictive policing
n278 or, in what has been called "the crossing of a moral Rubicon," in
target-selecting military drones.  n279 If the significant governmental power
wielded by administrative agencies could also be taken over by autonomous
algorithms, then surely society would face a grave specter of lives and
livelihoods being regulated by robots.

   Notwithstanding these ominous warnings, actual technological capabilities are
hardly so threatening. For much the same reason that science alone can never
"make" policy decisions,  n280 machine-learning algorithms need humans to
specify their objective functions and construct the mathematical processes that
will maximize them.  n281 Although machine learning could replace or supplement
many routine governmental tasks, the oversight and direction of the government
will remain in human hands even in the machine-learning era. Society's most
consequential regulatory decisions are not routine and therefore will almost
surely prove to be unsuitable candidates for automation; these most significant
regulatory policy decisions present complexities, uncertainties, and value
judgments that will resist the kind of specification needed to embed them in
mathematical objective functions. Machine-learning analysis will be able to
assist only by informing the most significant of regulatory choices, not by
determining them.  n282 The more routine decisions that algorithms will be able
to  [*1215]  make will surely affect people's lives and livelihoods, but in
these cases machine-learning applications will be designed to meet human
officials' specifications and will ultimately remain under human control.
Autonomous robots will not be wielding regulatory power on their own.

   For the reasons we have explained, nothing about algorithms makes them
uniquely or automatically unsuitable for use by administrative agencies in terms
of their ability to comport with core legal principles. Although
machine-learning systems can fit quite comfortably within existing
constitutional and administrative law, this does not mean that their use will
always be warranted.  n283 It especially does not mean that agencies should use
machine learning in a haphazard or irresponsible manner. Agencies will have to
act with care and, in designing and implementing their algorithms, consider
potential pitfalls and areas of concern. In the following two sections, we
briefly discuss how several key policy issues and good government principles
apply to machine learning applications. The policy issues relate to the four
legal doctrines discussed earlier: nondelegation, due process,
antidiscrimination, and transparency. The other principles of good government
apply more generally to the exploitation of algorithms by those in positions of
power. Only by engaging in a thorough, case-by-case evaluation of such
non-binding but vital considerations will agencies ensure that their use of
machine learning conforms not just to the law but also to foundational
principles of sound and legitimate public policy.

   A. RELATED PUBLIC POLICY CONCERNS

   In the previous Part, we demonstrated that, in principle, agencies'
machine-learning algorithms should withstand legal challenges based on doctrines
of nondelegation, due process, antidiscrimination, and transparency. Of course,
an escape from judicial censure does not necessarily guarantee that the
algorithms will be fully consonant with the public policy principles underlying
those doctrines. Some of the policy concerns animating the legal doctrines
discussed  [*1216]  in Part II still deserve attention if agencies are to use
machine learning in a responsible manner.

   For instance, we noted that one of the nondelegation doctrine's motivating
goals--ensuring political accountability--has prompted some scholars to advocate
that the courts should give more deference when an agency head makes the key
decision than when decisions are made by subordinate officials.  n284 The courts
have not embraced such a graduated approach, but its suggestion should prompt
agency officials to consider how machine learning may affect the locus of
decision making inside their agencies. When rules are intimately tied to the
outputs of an algorithm, the programming of that algorithm will be a
consequential task--one that presumably should not be assigned exclusively to a
lowerlevel analyst, as traditional statistical analyses may be today. Assigning
responsibility to lower-level analysts without adequate input and oversight
could run the risk that higher-level officials--those who are more directly
accountable to the political branches of government and to the public--will not
fully understand critical details about an already ostensibly opaque rulemaking
process. Perhaps worse, the lower-level analysts could make choices about an
algorithm's specifications and tuning without realizing potentially far-reaching
impacts of their decisions.  n285 For these reasons, agencies should be mindful
of who within an agency actually wields algorithm-specifying power and how well
high-level officials understand the methods of regulating by robot or
adjudicating by algorithm.

   Our discussion of due process similarly suggests that there is no reason to
view adjudicatory algorithms as uniquely threatening to fair hearings. Still,
agencies will need to proceed thoughtfully and with care.  n286 Agencies may
need to delay the deployment of their algorithms to get a sense of how well the
test-data error rates correspond with decision reversal rates--the metric
underlying the existing body of relevant case law. Furthermore, agencies should
increasingly seek out and engage neutral statistical experts to provide
dispassionate assessments of consequential uses of algorithms. Individuals
challenging an agency's deprivation of their rights or property cannot be
expected to mount a sufficiently probing search for an algorithm's potential
inadequacies and biases, either on their own or with the help of skilled, but
mathematically na[#xEF]ve, counsel. Even if not legally required, agencies
should still undertake the kind of probing inquiry needed to minimize possible
errors and biases associated with any algorithms they use.

    [*1217]  Agencies must also take note of the potential for their algorithms
to cause a disproportionate impact on members of certain classes or groups,
despite the probable constitutionality under the Fifth Amendment of the use of
such algorithms.  n287 Of all the policy concerns related to the legal doctrines
discussed in this Article, the possibility of disproportionate impacts may be
the most acute. In the popular and academic media, commentators have noted the
ways in which algorithmic bias can manifest itself.  n288 A series of violent
interactions between police and African-Americans over the last few years has
prompted public worry of pervasive discrimination by governmental authorities.
n289 Agencies should thus seek ways of mitigating algorithms' disparate impact.
But they should do so not just as a response to this public alarm, but also as a
matter of ethical governance. If discrimination, no matter how unintentional,
can be avoided, it should be. Recent advances in statistics, as noted earlier,
may provide agencies with powerful mitigating tools, but agencies will still
need to balance tradeoffs with forecasting accuracy.  n290

   Finally, we have shown that agencies should have no problem disclosing
sufficient information to meet the reason-giving and transparency requirements
of the APA and FOIA.  n291 Nevertheless, disclosing the bare minimum--probably
just the objective functions and limited aspects of algorithms'
specifications--should not be the ultimate goal of an open, forthcoming
administrative state. Agencies should begin developing practices for
documenting, retaining, and disclosing developmental algorithm specifications
and final algorithm supplemental output to increase transparency and facilitate
peer review.  n292

   B. OTHER GOOD GOVERNMENT PRINCIPLES

   In addition to policy concerns related to the four legal doctrines analyzed
in Part II, several other good government principles should be considered by
agencies when using machine learning. These principles relate to challenges
associated with quantification, permissible error, lack of empathy, job losses,
and privacy.

    [*1218]  First, agencies should recognize that the use of algorithms will
often compel agency decision makers to engage in quantitative coding of value
judgments that have typically been made qualitatively. For example,
machine-learning algorithms often permit the specification of their "cost"
ratios--the ratio of false positives to false negatives.  n293 This is a
concrete, unambiguous quantification of agencies' relative normative values of
their errors. For agencies not accustomed to making moral valuations through any
kind of formal process, let alone one that assigns them numbers,
machine-learning algorithms will necessitate addressing questions of
organizational and democratic decision making. Who should have the power to
transform qualitative moral judgments into a cost ratio? Should agencies involve
the public or at least make interested parties aware of a transformation from
qualitative to a quantitative assessment of errors and algorithmic tradeoffs? Is
such a transformation even possible, or are human deliberations over morality
too nuanced to be reduced to a matrix of error rates?  n294 Agencies will have
to confront not only the challenges of making accurate quantifications of error
rates but also contend with a host of relevant normative questions about
quantification as they proceed into the machine-learning era.

   Second, agencies will have to decide what constitutes "acceptable"
algorithmic error rates. This will go beyond the due process-related assessment
of whether courts will consider algorithm error rates acceptable. Instead, it
requires agencies to ask how large gains in accuracy must be to offset other
difficulties in implementing algorithmic systems. Such issues would likely arise
in the context of benefit-cost analyses that agencies conduct prior to taking
important actions. For example, how much would, say, a five percent increase in
accuracy when predicting hazardous waste pipeline incidents save an agency in
inspection costs? Would these savings be worth the necessary investments in
human capital and data infrastructure? And, beyond the internal difficulties
faced by agencies, would the public demand particularly large increases in
accuracy to compensate for the novelty, and potentially alarming nature, of
robotic systems of regulation or adjudication?  n295 Is a marginal improvement
over the status quo acceptable, or should agencies strive for something more?

    [*1219]  Third, we should consider what happens to human contact in a world
of robotic regulators and algorithmic adjudicators. Citizens expect their
government to be competent and efficient, but they also tend to view
governmental institutions as more legitimate when these institutions operate
with understanding and empathy.  n296 The idea of the government reducing
individuals to data points that are then fed into an algorithm will seem
disconcertingly impersonal--even if ultimately more accurate and efficient.
Administrative officials that use algorithms should seek to listen to interested
members of the public as they design systems for rulemaking by robot or
adjudicating by algorithm. These officials should also encourage participation
through interactive methods that treat beneficiaries, targets of regulation, and
all other affected parties with respect and dignity.  n297

   Fourth, government should not turn a blind eye to the possibility that
widespread use of algorithms will put many government workers out of their jobs.
n298 The extent to which agencies' workforces will shrink as a result of
adopting machine learning is unclear; as we have noted, human input will still
be necessary at many steps of regulatory and adjudicatory processes, even when
automated.  n299 But there can be little doubt that the structures of agencies'
workforces will change if day-to-day operations begin to take drastically
different forms due to automated decision making. With over 1.8 million
full-time  [*1220]  employees in the executive branch of the federal government,
n300 and many more working for government contractors, large-scale automation
efforts may be appropriately combined with proactive job training for workers
who might seek positions in the future in algorithm-support responsibilities.

   Finally, although throughout this Article we have self-consciously eschewed a
discussion of privacy concerns, for reasons noted earlier,  n301 agencies still
must never overlook these concerns. Administrative agencies are poised to
collect more data on individuals with each passing day. Agencies must properly
and securely store these data to minimize threats to privacy intrusions,
especially when many administrative applications of machine learning will
require inter-agency sharing through the cloud.  n302 Agencies may also
increasingly seek individuals' data from sources outside of the United States,
which will require careful consideration of jurisdictional questions.  n303

   C. A PATH FORWARD

   The issues we have raised in the preceding two sections should be addressed
as part of agencies' case-by-case assessments and benefit-cost analyses of
specific applications of machine learning. Agency and cross-agency decisions
about when and how to implement machine learning will benefit from clear
guidance on how to assess machine learning's merits.  n304 The Administrative
Conference of the United States, the National Academy of Public Administration,
or the National Academy of Sciences might be able to help in developing
guidelines. When agencies ultimately apply such guidelines and conduct
benefit-cost analysis of specific machine learning applications, we can expect
administrative algorithms will prove extremely promising in some instances and
less advantageous in others.  n305 Agencies should be suitably discerning and
pursue  [*1221]  machine learning applications when they can lead to meaningful
improvements in procedural and substantive outcomes.

   Recognition of the need for careful consideration and reasonable safeguards
when agencies use algorithms should not lead to any presumption against using
machine learning entirely. These techniques are becoming ubiquitous in private
industry for good reason; their ability to make accurate predictions of complex
phenomena can render decision making vastly more effective and efficient, and it
would be wise for administrative agencies also to seek these benefits.  n306
Still, accountable managers must carefully oversee their use of algorithms, even
in the private sector,  n307 and they must take possible unintended consequences
into account.  n308 The same can be said of all innovative practices. The need
to weigh the pros and cons of algorithms is in no way qualitatively different
than the weighing of benefits and costs needed to inform other administrative
choices,  n309 including those prompted by other technological advancements.
n310 Thoughtful implementation is always advisable for the adoption of any new
administrative technology or process.

   Deciding how and when to use machine learning may not come easily, which may
make agency efforts to facilitate public participation in decisions about the
use of machine learning even more important. It would certainly be better to
take additional time to engage in robust public consultation and make thoughtful
decisions about machine learning's use than to dismiss algorithms out of hand
over exaggerated fears about unleashing artificial intelligence "demons."  n311
Technological and analytical advances are continually invented and adopted
because, despite their potential limitations, they offer the possibility to
transform society for the better. The implementation of machine-learning
algorithms  [*1222]  by administrative agencies certainly possesses such
potential. With proper forethought and care guided by the kind of analysis we
have provided throughout this Article, an administrative state on the cutting
edge of statistical innovation can be legally and responsibly realized. Moving
in this direction can deliver marked improvements in overall well-being,
especially as the government faces new challenges in overseeing a private sector
that has already entered the machine-learning era.

   CONCLUSION

   We have considered a future American administrative state increasingly driven
by machine-learning algorithms. Such a future may not look like the
glamorously--or ominously--automated picture painted by popular media coverage
of artificial intelligence, but it nonetheless could entail significant changes
in how the government functions, whether in making certain rules or in applying
and enforcing them. Administrative agencies have begun to take steps toward such
a future, and our analysis offers support to agencies that seek to venture
further into this new era of administration. Agencies that rely on
machine-learning algorithms are unlikely to face unique, insurmountable legal
barriers, at least not under the key legal principles of the administrative
state that we have assessed here. By establishing the legality of the use of
machine learning, we believe our analysis clears away one of the more
significant hurdles to its further implementation. Of course, although our legal
analysis supports agency use of machine learning, we recognize that agencies
will need, as with any management or policy choice, to exercise care in how and
when they deploy new technology and will need to build the human capital and
information technology infrastructure to support rulemaking by robot and
adjudication by algorithm.  n312 To admit the need for such diligence in
execution, however, is no reason for preemptively shying away from the benefits
from government agencies' deployment of the latest statistical advancements.

   If agencies encounter public hesitancy about governmental use of artificial
intelligence, perhaps that anxiety will stem from a perception of
machine-learning algorithms as fundamentally different in kind from existing
decisionmaking processes. Something about the phrase "black box"--a common
description of machine learning techniques--may make machine learning sound
incompatible with notions of accountable government. But it would be more
accurate to view machine-learning algorithms, or any other statistical
procedures, not as complete black boxes, but rather as extensions of existing
human decision making. After all, human cognition and computerized algorithms
may process information in certain foundationally similar ways.  n313 The latter
are  [*1223]  black box in nature simply because they are, qualitatively
speaking, more complex and less intuitively understandable than conventional
techniques, perhaps also much like human decision making. Democratic government
itself, in a collective sense, is decision making according to the algorithm of
majority rule. The Constitution's establishment of a bicameral legislature and a
system of checks and balances established a complex decision-making algorithm
involving hundreds of officials elected by millions of voters. With the passage
of time, Congress, presidents, and agencies have imposed their own layers of
procedures for their work that are arguably as complex and counterintuitive as
any machine-learning algorithm.  n314 Just as some messiness and ineffability in
collective decision making may be the price of the benefits of democracy,
difficulty intuiting machine-learning results may be a relatively small price to
pay for more accurate and effective decisions in the administrative state.

   With the advent of artificial intelligence's widespread application
throughout all other realms of society, it will not be long before the
administrative state moves headlong to confront the questions we have analyzed
in this Article. For administrative agencies, what will distinguish the
machine-learning era is not a substitution of human judgment with some foreign
and unfamiliar methodology, but rather an evolution of human judgment to
incorporate fundamentally similar--albeit more accurate and often practically
more useful--processes of decision making made possible by advances in
statistical knowledge, data storage, and digital computing. The analysis offered
here provides an antidote to visceral reactions against the use of artificial
intelligence in the public sector, reactions we hope will give way to a measured
optimism capable of guiding and improving the future of the administrative
state.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Administrative LawAgency RulemakingGeneral OverviewComputer & Internet
LawPrivacy & SecurityGeneral OverviewGovernmentsFederal GovernmentDomestic
Security

FOOTNOTES:





n1  In the most general of terms, algorithms can be defined as "well-defined
set[s] of steps for accomplishing a certain goal." Joshua A. Kroll et al.,
Accountable Algorithms, 165 U. PA. L. REV. 633, 640 n.14 (2017).





n2  See Thiago S. Guzella & Walmir M. Caminhas, A Review of Machine Learning
Approaches to Spam Filtering, 36 EXPERT SYSTEMS WITH APPLICATIONS 10206 (2009).





n3  See W. Nicholson Price II, Black-Box Medicine, 28 HARV. J.L. & TECH. 419,
432-34 (2015).





n4  See Cade Metz, Now Anyone Can Tap the AI Behind Amazon's Recommendations,
WIRED (Apr. 9, 2015, 8:09 PM),
http://www.wired.com/2015/04/now-anyone-can-tap-ai-behind-amazons-recommendation
s/ [https://perma.cc/PQ33-JBG2].





n5  See Alexis C. Madrigal, The Trick That Makes Google's Self-Driving Cars Work
, ATLANTIC (May 15, 2014),
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/05/all-the-world-a-track-the-
trick-that-makes-googles-self-driving-cars-work/370871/
[https://perma.cc/XBM4-V7FK].





n6  The word "robot" has historically evoked an image of a physical entity
directly interacting with the world, but recent advances in artificial
intelligence have expanded that narrow conception of robotics. Here we primarily
discuss virtual robots contained within computer programs, but the
machine-learning algorithms underpinning them also increasingly support the
functioning of physical robots; self-driving cars developed by Google, for
instance, can predict the behavior of other cars and pedestrians on the road
using machine learning. Id.





n7  The CEO of Nvidia recently stated that "[i]t wasn't until the last few years
that AI could do things that people can't do." Andrew Nusca, The Current State
of Artificial Intelligence, According to Nvidia's CEO, FORTUNE (Mar. 22, 2016,
9:00 AM), http://fortune.com/2016/03/22/artificial-intelligence-nvidia/
[https://perma.cc/Q6YJ-LHG6]. He also noted how, over the past two years, the
number of companies using deep learning, a prominent kind of machine learning,
has grown thirty-five times larger. Id.





n8  VIKTOR MAYER-SCH[#xD6]NBERGER & KENNETH CUKIER, BIG DATA: A REVOLUTION THAT
WILL TRANSFORM HOW WE LIVE, WORK, AND THINK 7 (2013).





n9  See generally ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON & ANDREW MCAFEE, THE SECOND MACHINE AGE:
WORK, PROGRESS, AND PROSPERITY IN A TIME OF BRILLIANT TECHNOLOGIES (2014)
(describing how digital technologies have prompted shifts in employment and life
and how individuals can respond to these shifts); TYLER COWEN, AVERAGE IS OVER:
POWERING AMERICA BEYOND THE AGE OF THE GREAT STAGNATION (2013) (describing
recent developments in the labor force and how technology has played into those
changes); MARTIN FORD, RISE OF THE ROBOTS: TECHNOLOGY AND THE THREAT OF A
JOBLESS FUTURE (2015); Claire Cain Miller, As Robots Grow Smarter, American
Workers Struggle to Keep Up, N.Y. TIMES (Dec. 15, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/16/upshot/as-robots-grow-smarter-american-workers
-struggle-to-keepup. html [https://perma.cc/X2X3-3T8V]; Eduardo Porter, Jobs
Threatened by Machines: A Once 'Stupid' Concern Gains Respect, N.Y. TIMES (June
7, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/08/business/economy/threatened-by-machines-a-once
-stupid-concern-gains-respect.html [https://perma.cc/APL4-6JJH]; Jason Furman,
Chairman, Council of Econ. Advisers, Is This Time Different? The Opportunities
and Challenges of Artificial Intelligence, Remarks at AI Now: The Social and
Economic Implications of Artificial Intelligence Technologies in the Near Term
(July 7, 2016),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160707_cea_ai_furman
.pdf [https://perma.cc/D3M8-77QW].





n10  JOHN MARKOFF, MACHINES OF LOVING GRACE: THE QUEST FOR COMMON GROUND BETWEEN
HUMANS AND ROBOTS 327 (2015). Debates have begun to emerge over other scenarios
made possible by machine learning, such as a future transportation network that
may be based on self-driving cars. See Robert Hutchinson, Driverless Cars: What
Could Possibly Go Wrong?, HARV. BUS. REV. (Jan. 15, 2016),
https://hbr.org/2016/01/driverless-cars-what-could-possibly-go-wrong
[https://perma.cc/XJ7U-DQVL]; Claire Cain Miller, If Robots Drove, How Much
Safer Would Roads Be?, N.Y. TIMES (June 10, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/10/upshot/if-robots-drove-how-much-safer-would-ro
ads-be.html [https://perma.cc/8NRU-LPJY]; Tom Vanderbilt, Let the Robot Drive:
The Autonomous Car of the Future Is Here, WIRED (Jan. 20, 2012, 3:24 PM),
http://www.wired.com/2012/01/ff_autonomouscars/all [https://perma.cc/YGN9-CSAK].
In addition, there is worry that algorithms are serving an inappropriate,
editorial role in selecting which news items to display on social media feeds.
See Jeffrey Herbst, The Algorithm Is an Editor, WALL ST. J. (Apr. 13, 2016, 6:09
PM), http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-algorithm-is-an-editor-1460585346
[https://perma.cc/FGW6-3BNF]. Finally, deep concerns about personal privacy have
been implicated by increasing reliance on big data analytics; the amount of
potentially personally identifiable information being collected by commercial
firms keeps growing exponentially, and even if this information is maintained by
separate entities, new methods of analysis make it increasingly easy to piece
together disparate information to form highly personal portraits. See
MAYER-SCH[#xD6]NBERGER & CUKIER, supra note 8, at 152-57.





n11  Samuel Gibbs, Elon Musk: Artificial Intelligence Is Our Biggest Existential
Threat, GUARDIAN (Oct. 27, 2014, 6:26 AM),
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/27/elon-musk-artificial-intellige
nce-ai-biggest-existential-threat [https://perma.cc/SZD4-7WCL].





n12  Rory Cellan-Jones, Stephen Hawking Warns Artificial Intelligence Could End
Mankind, BBC NEWS (Dec. 2, 2014), http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540
[https://perma.cc/Q4YD-ZURC].





n13  MARKOFF, supra note 10, at iv. One recent book characterizes modern
algorithms as "weapons." See generally CATHY O'NEIL, WEAPONS OF MATH
DESTRUCTION: HOW BIG DATA INCREASES INEQUALITY AND THREATENS DEMOCRACY (2016).





n14  See Bill Keller, Opinion, Smart Drones, N.Y. TIMES (Mar. 16, 2013),
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/17/opinion/sunday/keller-smart-drones.html
[https://perma.cc/R3N9-ZTUH]; John Markoff, Fearing Bombs That Can Pick Whom to
Kill, N.Y. TIMES (Nov. 11, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/12/science/weapons-directed-by-robots-not-humans-
raise-ethical-questions.html [https://perma.cc/735E-LNZR].





n15  See ACLU v. Clapper, 785 F.3d 787, 826 (2d Cir. 2015) (holding that the
National Security Agency's bulk telephone metadata collection exceeded the scope
of what Congress had authorized in the USA PATRIOT Act). On the political debate
over national security surveillance, see, for example, Glenn Greenwald & Ewen
MacAskill, NSA Prism Program Taps in to User Data of Apple, Google and Others,
GUARDIAN (June 7, 2013, 3:23 PM),
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data
[https://perma.cc/XM4Q-QE32]; Andrea Peterson, NSA Reform Bill Passes House,
Despite Loss of Support from Privacy Advocates, WASH. POST (May 22, 2014),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2014/05/22/nsa-reform-bill-pas
ses-house-despite-loss-of-support-from-privacy-advocates/
[https://perma.cc/Z52M-MTBP]. On legal issues raised by post-9/11 governmental
surveillance, see, for example, Bruce Ackerman, The Emergency Constitution, 113
YALE L.J. 1029 (2004); Kim Lane Scheppele, Law in a Time of Emergency: States of
Exception and the Temptations of 9/11, 6 U. PA. J. CONST. L. 1001 (2004); Daniel
J. Solove, Data Mining and the Security-Liberty Debate, 75 U. CHI. L. REV. 343
(2008).





n16  See Steven M. Bellovin et al., When Enough Is Enough: Location Tracking,
Mosaic Theory, and Machine Learning, 8 N.Y.U. J.L. & LIBERTY 556, 575-76 (2014)
(advancing the proposition that the use of machine learning to infer information
about individuals is a new form of privacy invasion that needs to be squared
with the Fourth Amendment). In addition, law enforcement authorities' increasing
use of machine learning to predict crime--so-called predictive policing--has
similarly raised concerns about racially-biased targeting as well as questions
about the very possibility that individuals with a propensity toward criminality
could be identified and punished for crimes that they have not yet committed.
See MAYER-SCH[#xD6]NBERGER & CUKIER, supra note 8, at 157-63; Andrew Guthrie
Ferguson, Policing Predictive Policing, 94 WASH. U. L. REV. (forthcoming 2017);
Maurice Chammah with Mark Hansen, Policing the Future, VERGE (Feb. 3, 2016, 8:01
AM), http://www.theverge.com/2016/2/3/10895804/st-louis-police-hunchlab-
predictive-policing-marshall-project [https://perma.cc/2T87-VJCQ]; Matt Stroud,
The Minority Report: Chicago's New Police Computer Predicts Crimes, But Is It
Racist?, VERGE (Feb. 19, 2014, 9:31 AM),
http://www.theverge.com/2014/2/19/5419854/the-minority-report-this-computer-pred
icts-crime-but-is-it-racist [https://perma.cc/NX4G-5A99]; see also Maria
Konnikova, The Future of Fraud-Busting, ATLANTIC (Mar. 2016),
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/03/the-future-of-fraud-busting/
426867/ [https://perma.cc/6CQM-X8QH] (discussing use of predictive analytics to
identify future "con artists, and then interven[ing] before they cause
trouble"). There have also been worries that current Fourth Amendment doctrine
may be ill-equipped to handle law enforcement's prediction of criminal activity
using machine learning. See, e.g., Michael L. Rich, Machine Learning, Automated
Suspicion Algorithms, and the Fourth Amendment, 164 U. PA. L. REV. 871 (2016).





n17  Sean Braswell, All Rise for Chief Justice Robot!, OZY (June 7, 2015),
http://www.ozy.com/immodest-proposal/all-rise-for-chief-justice-robot/41131
[https://perma.cc/G86F-9WYP].





n18  Maureen Dowd, Beware Our Mind Children, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 25, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/26/opinion/sunday/maureen-dowd-beware-our-mind-ch
ildren.html [https://perma.cc/NK4G-4896] ("Can [Alex Garland] envision an A.I.
president, even more sleek and less emotive than the one we have now? 'There
could be an A.I. president; there could,' he replies."); Studio 360: The
Computer as Artist, WNYC RADIO & PRI (Nov. 12, 2015),
http://www.wnyc.org/story/the-computer-as-artist/ [https://perma.cc/LEK8-GTWE]
(stating that his so-called "creativity machine," an artificial intelligence
system, should be used "in the White House").





n19  Abraham Lincoln, Gettysburg Address (Nov. 19, 1863).





n20  Cf. Ed Felten, Accountable Algorithms, FREEDOM TO TINKER (Sept. 12, 2012),
https://freedom-to-tinker.com/2012/09/12/accountable-algorithms/
[https://perma.cc/TV9N-CGYA] (describing how the use of algorithmic decision
making in lieu of human decision making may necessitate making these algorithms
more technically accountable).





n21  See supra notes 2-7.





n22  Cary Coglianese, Optimizing Government for an Optimizing Economy, in
SECTION 8: POLITICS, NEW ENTREPRENEURIAL GROWTH AGENDA (2016),
http://www.kauffman.org/neg/section-8#optimizinggovernmentforanoptimizingeconomy
[https://perma.cc/EUK2-EYSR]. Governments themselves are increasingly
recognizing the need to oversee artificial intelligence itself. For example, the
UK's House of Commons Science and Technology Committee recently launched an
inquiry into "the social, legal, and ethical issues raised by developments of .
. . artificial intelligence." Science and Technology Committee (Commons),
Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Inquiry Launched, U.K. PARLIAMENT (Mar. 24,
2016),
http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/scien
ce-and-technology-committee/news-parliament-2015/robotics-and-artificial-intelli
gence-inquiry-launch-15-16/ [https://perma.cc/VQ49-9VQM]. Also, the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy hosted a series of public workshops in
2016 about the risks of machine learning, including its uses in government. Ed
Felten, Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence, WHITE HOUSE BLOG
(May 3, 2016, 3:01 PM),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/05/03/preparing-future-artificial-intellige
nce [https://perma.cc/3G6G-KRZF].





n23  See generally F.A. HAYEK, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM (1944); THEODORE J. LOWI, THE
END OF LIBERALISM: THE SECOND REPUBLIC OF THE UNITED STATES (2d ed. 1979); DAVID
SCHOENBROD, POWER WITHOUT RESPONSIBILITY: HOW CONGRESS ABUSES THE PEOPLE THROUGH
DELEGATION (1993).





n24  Cf. Free Enter. Fund v. Pub. Co. Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U.S. 477,
497 (2010) ("The diffusion of power carries with it a diffusion of
accountability.").





n25  We know of no other work of scholarship that comprehensively analyzes the
constitutional and administrative law issues implicated by machine learning in
the regulatory state. Admittedly, for more than a decade it has been clear that
"many possibilities exist for applying information technologies in new ways to
government rulemaking." Cary Coglianese, E-Rulemaking: Information Technology
and the Regulatory Process, 56 ADMIN. L. REV. 353, 369 (2004). A few scholars
have recently identified ways that machine learning could be used by regulatory
agencies to improve regulatory outcomes. See Anthony J. Casey & Anthony Niblett,
The Death of Rules and Standards (Univ. of Chicago Public Law Working Paper No.
550, 2015), http://ssrn.com/abstract_2693826 [https://perma.cc/9YDG-RBRC]
(noting how agencies may implement machine learning to let entities know whether
their discrete actions would be aligned with broad legislatively-established
standards); Joshua Mitts, Predictive Regulation (June 27, 2014) (unpublished
manuscript), http://ssrn.com/abstract_2411816 [https://perma.cc/GVU5-VU5D]
(discussing the use of machine learning to identify market trends indicating
future need for regulation). Moreover, some recent or forthcoming papers provide
some initial consideration of accountability or fairness issues related to the
use of algorithms, broadly defined, across a range of decision-making settings.
See, e.g., Kroll et al., supra note 1 (briefly taking up machine-learning
algorithms in the context of discrimination, but mainly focusing on algorithms
more generally); Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Cyberdelegation and the
Administrative State 1 (Stanford Public Law Working Paper No. 2754385, 2016),
http://ssrn.com/abstract_2754385 [https://perma.cc/3EYG-62WJ]) (exploring "some
of the questions and trade-offs associated with delegating administrative agency
decisions to computer algorithms").





n26  Cf. Adrian Vermeule, Conventions of Agency Independence, 113 COLUM. L. REV.
1163 (2013) (describing conventions and norms surrounding the administrative
state, particularly agency independence).





n27  See Metz, supra note 4 (describing Amazon's use of machine learning to
recommend products to consumers).





n28  See Jessica Davis, Zillow Uses Analytics, Machine Learning to Disrupt with
Data, INFORMATIONWEEK (Oct. 14, 2016, 11:06 AM),
http://www.informationweek.com/big-data/zillow-uses-analytics-machine-learning-t
o-disrupt-with-data/d/d-id/1327175 [https://perma.cc/8UTD-QX6S] (describing
Zillow's use of machine learning to provide forecasts of housing prices).





n29  See Falguni Desai, The Age of Artificial Intelligence in Fintech, FORBES
(June 30, 2016, 10:42 PM),
http://www.forbes.com/sites/falgunidesai/2016/06/30/the-age-of-artificial-intell
igence-in-fintech [https://perma.cc/EK89-DD3Y] (describing how fintech firms use
artificial intelligence to improve investment strategies and analyze consumer
financial activity).





n30  For a discussion of these and other examples of an increasingly optimizing
economy, see Coglianese, supra note 22.





n31  NICK BOSTROM, SUPERINTELLIGENCE: PATHS, DANGERS, STRATEGIES 11 (2014). Of
note, machine learning recently bested human intelligence in the incredibly
complex game of Go. See David Silver et al., Mastering the Game of Go with Deep
Neural Networks and Tree Search, 529 NATURE 484, 484 (2016).





n32  See Coglianese, supra note 22. A senior strategist at the National Security
Agency has noted how advanced analytic techniques are particularly essential for
agencies that will soon be forced "to operate at cyberspeed and at scale." GOV'T
BUS. COUNCIL, GOV'T EXEC. MEDIA GRP., DATA ANALYTICS: A STRATEGIC ASSET TO
GOVERNMENT 2 (2015),
http://cdn.govexec.com/media/gbc/docs/2015-09-03_qlik_issue_brief_designed_4.pdf
[https://perma.cc/LY76-FY5V].





n33  See RICHARD A. BERK, STATISTICAL LEARNING FROM A REGRESSION PERSPECTIVE 13
(2008).





n34  For a discussion of the inferential value of outputs from machine-learning
algorithms, see id. at 9-17.





n35  ETHEM ALPAYDIN, INTRODUCTION TO MACHINE LEARNING 3 (2d ed. 2010). In the
broader field, the varied types of machine learning are referred to by a
dizzying array of different terms, some technical, some colloquial, for example:
smart machines, expert systems, neural networks, deep learning, hierarchical
learning, reinforcement learning, structured learning, and more. Although we
explain some of these different terms in this Part, for the most part throughout
this Article we use the terms "machine learning," "algorithms," and "artificial
intelligence" for convenience to capture all possible variations in terms, as we
are concerned primarily with the legal issues surrounding the general use of
this family of techniques.





n36  See, e.g., Cheng-Lin Liu et al., Handwritten Digit Recognition:
Benchmarking of State-of-the-Art Techniques, 36 PATTERN RECOGNITION 2271 (2003);
Y. LeCun et al., Comparison of Learning Algorithms for Handwritten Digit
Recognition, Presented at the International Conference on Artificial Neural
Networks (1995), http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/publis/pdf/lecun-95b.pdf
[https://perma.cc/2NGQ-85FS].





n37  This is an example of supervised machine learning, where each handwritten
digit is labeled with its correct digit so that the algorithm knows when it is
making errors. Unsupervised learning uses unlabeled data, so that performance
criteria being optimized are not measures of error rates, because the truth is
not known, but measures of similarity between digits determined by the algorithm
to be the same. See ALPAYDIN, supra note 35, at 11-13.





n38  See id. at 9-11.





n39  See id. at 13-14; see also Cade Metz, In a Huge Breakthrough, Google's AI
Beats a Top Player at the Game of Go, WIRED (Jan. 27, 2016, 1:00 PM),
http://www.wired.com/2016/01/in-a-huge-breakthrough-googles-ai-beats-a-top-playe
r-at-the-game-of-go/ [https://perma.cc/9YQ9-LHM4].





n40  These benefits result from the mathematical techniques of boosting or
bagging (or both). For demonstrations of these benefits resulting from boosting,
see Robert E. Schapire, The Boosting Approach to Machine Learning: An Overview,
Presented at the MSRI Workshop on Nonlinear Estimation and Classification
(2002),
https://www.cs.princeton.edu/picasso/mats/schapire02boosting_schapire.pdf
[https://perma.cc/64PZ-PY57]. For an illustration of similar benefits resulting
from bagging, see Leo Breiman, Some Infinity Theory for Predictor Ensembles
(U.C. Berkeley Technical Report 577, 2000),
https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/breiman/some_theory2000.pdf
[https://perma.cc/KZ3D-RWMY]; Peter B[#xFC]hlmann & Bin Yu, Explaining Bagging,
Presented at the Seminar f[#xFC]r Statistik (2000),
http://e-collection.library.ethz.ch/eserv/eth:23905/eth-23905-01.pdf
[https://perma.cc/CPE2-QEAF]. For a demonstration of the benefits resulting from
combined classifiers achieved through both bagging and boosting, see V.
Koltchinskii & D. Panchenko, Empirical Margin Distributions and Bounding the
Generalization Error of Combined Classifiers, 30 ANNALS STAT. 1 (2002).





n41  See, e.g., Volodymyr Mnih et al., Human-Level Control Through Deep
Reinforcement Learning, 518 NATURE 529, 529 (2015); Kaiming He et al., Delving
Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on ImageNet
Classification, Presented at the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (2015), http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01852 [https://perma.cc/5ERE-L2HK]; Bo
Pang et al., Thumbs Up? Sentiment Classification Using Machine Learning
Techniques, Presented at the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (2002), http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/llee/papers/sentiment.pdf
[https://perma.cc/G4VS-XYM2].





n42  See, e.g., Leo Breiman, Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures, 16 STAT.
SCI. 199, 199 (2001).





n43  For example, a common machine-learning algorithm known as random forests
generates its predictions by, roughly speaking, producing thousands of decision
trees (called classification or regression trees) and then averaging predictions
across all trees. See Leo Breiman, Random Forests, 45 MACHINE LEARNING 5, 5
(2001). The analyst can examine the structure of a particular tree and determine
to some extent how variables and interactions between variables functionally
affect the predictions, but this will tell the analyst nothing about all such
processes in the forest as a whole.





n44  See Breiman, supra note 42, at 199-200.





n45  Alex Chen et al., Distributed Neural Networks with GPUs in the AWS Cloud,
NETFLIX TECH BLOG (Feb. 10, 2014),
http://techblog.netflix.com/2014/02/distributed-neural-networks-with-gpus.html
[https://perma.cc/T7CR-7QGM].





n46  Ian J. Goodfellow et al., Multi-Digit Number Recognition from Street View
Imagery Using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks, CORNELL UNIV. LIB. COMP.
VISION & PATTERN RECOGNITION (2013), http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6082
[https://perma.cc/H7KK-DZJT].





n47  Joe Kava, Better Data Centers Through Machine Learning, GOOGLE OFFICIAL
BLOG (May 28, 2014),
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2014/05/better-data-centers-through-machine.html
[https://perma.cc/ZEP4-2Z8M].





n48  See Madrigal, supra note 5.





n49  See Quentin Hardy, Wealth Managers Enlist Spy Tools to Map Portfolios, N.Y.
TIMES, (Aug. 3, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/04/technology/wealth-managers-enlist-spy-tools-to
-map-portfolios.html [https://perma.cc/K4F4-VZEE]; see also MICHAEL LEWIS, FLASH
BOYS: AWALL STREET REVOLT 36 (2014).





n50  See, e.g., Richard Berk et al., Forecasting Murder Within a Population of
Probationers and Parolees: A High Stakes Application of Statistical Learning,
172 J. ROYAL STAT. SOC'Y SERIES A (STAT. IN SOC'Y) 191 (2009).





n51  See, e.g., Brian Kriegler & Richard Berk, Small Area Estimation of the
Homeless in Los Angeles: An Application of Cost-Sensitive Stochastic Gradient
Boosting, 4 ANNALS APPLIED STAT. 1234 (2010).





n52  See, e.g., Dursun Delen, A Comparative Analysis of Machine Learning
Techniques for Student Retention Management, 49 DECISION SUPPORT SYS. 498
(2010).





n53  Although outside our scope, we note that courts are also increasingly
looking to machine learning as a tool for discovery in the litigation process.
See, e.g., Wallis M. Hampton, Predictive Coding: It's Here to Stay, SKADDEN (May
5, 2014),
https://www.skadden.com/sites/default/files/publications/LIT_JuneJuly14_EDiscove
ryBulletin.pdf [https://perma.cc/4WHG-ZLKF] (noting courts' increasing interest
in and favorable inclination toward the use of machine learning to assist in
e-discovery).





n54  See, e.g., STEPHEN GOLDSMITH & SUSAN CRAWFORD, THE RESPONSIVE CITY:
ENGAGING COMMUNITIES THROUGH DATA-SMART GOVERNANCE (2014); Bechara Choucair, Jay
Bhatt & Raed Mansour, How Cities Are Using Analytics to Improve Public Health,
HARV. BUS. REV. (Sept. 15, 2014),
https://hbr.org/2014/09/how-cities-are-using-analytics-to-improve-public-health/
[https://perma.cc/R26N-7RU2].





n55  Nick Rojas, Chicago and Big Data, TECHCRUNCH (Oct. 22, 2014),
http://techcrunch.com/2014/10/22/chicago-and-big-data/
[https://perma.cc/P47F-9JKV]; see also Edward L. Glaeser et al., Crowdsourcing
City Government: Using Tournaments to Improve Inspection Accuracy, 106 AM. ECON.
REV. 114, 114 (2016). Interestingly, similar restaurant hygiene algorithms
deployed in Boston were developed via crowdsourcing, a potentially
cost-effective alternative to private contracting in certain situations. Id.





n56  Ash Center Mayors Challenge Research Team, Chicago's SmartData Platform:
Pioneering Open Source Municipal Analytics, DATA-SMART CITY SOLUTIONS (Jan. 8,
2014),
http://datasmart.ash.harvard.edu/news/article/chicago-mayors-challenge-367
[https://perma.cc/MY8X-PDD6].





n57  THE MAYOR'S OFFICE OF DATA ANALYTICS, CITY OF NEW YORK,
http://www1.nyc.gov/site/analytics/index.page [https://perma.cc/4QTF-M3UL].





n58  Brian Heaton, New York City Fights Fire with Data, GOV'T TECH. (May 15,
2015),
http://www.govtech.com/public-safety/New-York-City-Fights-Fire-with-Data.html
[https://perma.cc/XG7W-5UYH].





n59  Gabe Cherry, Google, U-M to Build Digital Tools for Flint Water Crisis, U.
MICH. NEWS (May 3, 2016),
http://ns.umich.edu/new/multimedia/videos/23780-google-u-m-to-build-digital-tool
s-for-flint-water-crisis [https://perma.cc/GV4C-LR6N].





n60  Ian Lovett, To Fight Gridlock, Los Angeles Synchronizes Every Red Light,
N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 1, 2013),
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/02/us/to-fight-gridlock-los-angeles
-synchronizes-every-red-light.html [https://perma.cc/25T2-DCFG]; David Z.
Morris, How Swarming Traffic Lights Could Save Drivers Billions of Dollars,
FORTUNE (July 13, 2015, 4:47 PM),
http://fortune.com/2015/07/13/swarming-traffic-lights
[https://perma.cc/KP8C-N88S].





n61  By 1988, USPS contractors had developed one of the first methods for
extracting visual images from envelopes and compiling them into an analyzable
data set. See Ching-Huei Wang & Sargur N. Srihari, A Framework for Object
Recognition in a Visually Complex Environment and Its Application to Locating
Address Blocks on Mail Pieces, 2 INT'L J. COMP. VISION 125, 125 (1988). This
data set then enabled the development of early algorithms analyzing handwritten
zip codes. See O. Matan et al., Handwritten Character Recognition Using Neural
Network Architectures, Presented at the 4th USPS Advanced Technology Conference
(1990), http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/publis/pdf/matan-90.pdf
[https://perma.cc/P4LS-5HZH].





n62  David John Gagne II et al., Day-Ahead Hail Prediction Integrating Machine
Learning with Storm-Scale Numerical Weather Models, Presented at the
Twenty-Seventh Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence
(2015), http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/IAAI/IAAI15/paper/view/9724/9898
[https://perma.cc/ZZ97-3UCJ].





n63  More than a decade ago, the General Accountability Office surveyed 128
federal agencies and found that fifty-two of them were engaged in "data mining"
activities, defined broadly "as the application of database technology and
techniques--such as statistical analysis and modeling--to uncover hidden
patterns and subtle relationships in data and to infer rules that allow for the
prediction of future results." U.S. GEN. ACCOUNTING OFFICE, GAO-04-548,
DATAMINING: FEDERAL EFFORTS COVER A WIDE RANGE OF USES 4 (2004). It is not clear
from the report how many of these efforts involved machine-learning techniques
as opposed to more traditional statistical methods. We know of no comparable
effort to survey agencies across government about their use of machine learning.





n64  U.S. ENVTL. PROT. AGENCY, TOXCAST FACT SHEET (2013),
http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2013-12/documents/toxcast-fact-sheet.p
df [https://perma.cc/P3UU-YL4X].





n65  Robert Kavlock et al., Update on EPA's ToxCast Program: Providing High
Throughput Decision Support Tools for Chemical Risk Management, 25 CHEMISTRY
RES. TOXICOLOGY 1287, 1295 (2012). On the use of machine learning in toxicology,
see Huanxiang Liu, Xiaojun Yao & Paola Gramatica, The Applications of Machine
Learning Algorithms in the Modeling of Estrogen-Like Chemicals, 12 COMBINATORIAL
CHEM. & HIGH THROUGHPUT SCREENING 490 (2009).





n66  Matthew T. Martin et al., Economic Benefits of Using Adaptive Predictive
Models of Reproductive Toxicity in the Context of a Tiered Testing Program, 58
SYS. BIOLOGY REPROD. MED. 3, 4-6 (2012).





n67  Richard S. Judson et al., Estimating Toxicity-Related Biological Pathway
Altering Doses for High-Throughput Chemical Risk Assessment, 24 CHEM. RES.
TOXICOLOGY 451, 457-60 (2011).





n68  Jane Martin & Rick Stephenson, Risk-Based Collection Model Development and
Testing, Presented at the Internal Revenue Service Research Conference (2005),
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/05stephenson.pdf [https://perma.cc/M65K-D9D7].





n69  David DeBarr & Maury Harwood, Relational Mining for Compliance Risk,
Presented at the Internal Revenue Service Research Conference (2004),
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/04debarr.pdf [https://perma.cc/Y9F8-RWNK].





n70  See CHRIS WAGNER ET AL., TAXPAYER ADVOCATE SERV., IRS Policy Implementation
Through Systems Programming Lacks Transparency and Precludes Adequate Review, in
2010 ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS 71, 76,
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-utl/2010arcmsp5_policythruprogramming.pdf
[https://perma.cc/3DHR-ZXAT]. Interestingly, this program was temporarily halted
in 2014 not because of issues with its predictive algorithms, but due to
continued reliance on human tax examiners; the Automated Underreporter System
that predicts underreporting was successfully deployed, but the Case Management
System that then handed flagged cases to humans for further examination did not
meet technical requirements. See TREASURY INSPECTOR GEN. FOR TAX ADMIN.,
2014-20-088, THE INFORMATION REPORTING AND DOCUMENT MATCHING CASE MANAGEMENT
SYSTEM COULD NOT BE DEPLOYED (2014),
https://www.treasury.gov/tigta/auditreports/2014reports/201420088fr.pdf
[https://perma.cc/E3CS-VLEL].





n71  U.S. INTERNAL REVENUE SERV., FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST 63 (2011),
https://www.treasury.gov/about/budget-performance/Documents/CJ_FY2012_IRS_508.pd
f [https://perma.cc/GB72-GXW5].





n72  U.S. INTERNAL REVENUE SERV., FY 2016 PRESIDENT'S BUDGET 88 (2015),
https://www.treasury.gov/about/budget-performance/CJ16/02-06.%20IRS%20FY%202016%
20CJ.pdf [https://perma.cc/2BXVDPFQ].





n73  U.S. INTERNAL REVENUE SERV., supra note 71, at 63.





n74  Commissioner's Fellowship Program: Final Report Abstracts, U.S. FOOD & DRUG
ADMIN.,
https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/WorkingatFDA/FellowshipInternshipGraduateFacultyPro
grams/CommissionersFellowshipProgram/ucm413253.htm [https://perma.cc/67MG-UXJL].
Work by the same researcher has similarly used machine-learning algorithms to
extract laboratory test information from FDA decision summaries of device
premarket notifications. Yanna Shen Kang & Mehmet Kayaalp, Extracting Laboratory
Test Information from Biomedical Text, 4 J. PATHOL. INFORM. 23 (2013).





n75  U.S. FOOD & DRUG ADMIN., MOU 225-12-0010, MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION AND MASSACHUSETTS
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (2012),
http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/PartnershipsCollaborations/MemorandaofUnderstandingM
OUs/AcademiaMOUs/ucm318476.htm [https://perma.cc/DUA8-9KM4].





n76  For the research surveyed, see Amir E. Khandani et al., Consumer Credit
Risk Models via Machine-Learning Algorithms, 34 J. BANKING & FIN. 2767 (2010).





n77  See, e.g., Johan Perols, Financial Statement Fraud Detection: An Analysis
of Statistical and Machine Learning Algorithms, 30 AUDITING 19 (2011).





n78  Francisco Cantu & Sebastian M. Saiegh, A Supervised Machine Learning
Procedure to Detect Electoral Fraud Using Digital Analysis (Caltech/MIT Voting
Technology Project, Working Paper No. 11, 2010),
http://ssrn.com/abstract_1594406 [https://perma.cc/NSJ2-9FD9].





n79  Cleridy E. Lennert-Cody & Richard A. Berk, Statistical Learning Procedures
for Monitoring Regulatory Compliance: An Application to Fisheries Data, 170 J.
ROYAL STAT. SOC'Y SERIES A (STAT. IN SOC'Y) 671 (2007); see also Richard Berk,
Forecasting Consumer Safety Violations and Violators, in IMPORT SAFETY:
REGULATORY GOVERNANCE IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY 131, 135-36 (Cary Coglianese, Adam
M. Finkel & David Zaring eds., 2009).





n80  See, e.g., Scott W. Bauguess, Deputy Chief Economist, U.S. Sec. & Exch.
Comm'n, The Hope and Limitations of Machine Learning in Market Risk Assessment
(Mar. 6, 2015),
http://cfe.columbia.edu/files/seasieor/center-financial-engineering/presentation
s/MachineLearningSECRiskAssessment030615public.pdf [https://perma.cc/HY5T-GKXH];
Scott D. O'Malia, Commissioner, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n, Opening
Statement at the 12th Meeting of the Technology Advisory Committee (June 3,
2014), http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/omaliastatement060314
[https://perma.cc/RK4T-UK84].





n81  Letter from R. John Hansman, Chairman, U.S. Fed. Aviation Admin. Res.,
Eng'g & Dev. Advisory Comm., to Michael P. Huerta, Administrator, U.S. Fed.
Aviation Admin. (Oct. 2, 2013),
http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ang/offices/tc/about/ca
mpus/faa_host/rdm/media/pdf/Guidance-FY2016.pdf [https://perma.cc/2VDQ-SVZ3];
see also U.S. FED. AVIATION ADMIN., MEETING MINUTES OF THE RESEARCH,
ENGINEERING, AND DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 7 (2012),
http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ang/offices/tc/about/ca
mpus/faa_host/rdm/media/pdf/minutes-FullComm_09262012.pdf
[https://perma.cc/DNG9-GET4] (noting that the agency is "taking a look at
overarching data management").





n82  U.S. FED. DEPOSIT INS. CORP., BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY STRATEGIC PLAN 2013-2017,
at 8 (2013),
https://www.fdic.gov/about/strategic/it_plan/BusinessTechnologyStrategicPlan2013
-2017.pdf [https://perma.cc/L7KE-KPT4].





n83  Michael Byrne, Big Data, FCC BLOG (Oct. 28, 2010, 1:06 PM),
https://www.fcc.gov/news-events/blog/2010/10/28/big-data
[https://perma.cc/AU7Q-J6XA].





n84  See Press Release, Office of Sci. and Tech. Policy, Obama Administration
Unveils "Big Data" Initiative: Announces $ 200 Million in New R&D Investments
(Mar. 29, 2012), http://www.whitehouse.
gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/big_data_press_release_final_2.pdf
[https://perma.cc/GX57-AB83].





n85  Aaron Boyd, Obama Budget Pushes Better Decisions Using Open Data, FED.
TIMES (Feb. 3, 2015),
http://www.federaltimes.com/story/government/management/budget/2015/02/03/open-d
ata-evidence-based-decisions-funded-2016-budget/22802323
[https://perma.cc/63U6-CQUG].





n86  See generally Legal Entity Identifier-Frequently Asked Questions, U.S. OFF.
OF FIN. RES., http://financialresearch.gov/data/legal-entity-identifier-faqs
[https://perma.cc/LH9B-YUG9] (answering frequently asked questions about the
legal entity identifier).





n87  See Statement on Legal Entity Identification for Financial Contracts, 75
Fed. Reg. 74,146 (Nov. 30, 2010).





n88  Matthew Reed, Legal Entity Identifier System Turns a Corner, U.S. OFF. OF
FIN. RES. (July 3, 2014),
https://financialresearch.gov/from-the-management-team/2014/07/03/legal-entity-i
dentifier-system-turns-a-corner/ [https://perma.cc/6H64-VFFL].





n89  U.S. OFF. OF FIN. RES., supra note 86.





n90  See Response to-Request for Information: Preparing for the Future of
Artificial Intelligence, IBM
http://research.ibm.com/cognitive-computing/ostp/rfi-response.shtml
[https://perma.cc/5PGS-J24T] (describing how AI systems deployed at scale will
require "high-performance distributed cloud systems, new computing architectures
such as neuromorphic and approximate computing, and new devices such as quantum
and new types of memory devices").





n91  Taha A. Kass-Hout, FDA Leverages Big Data Via Cloud Computing, FDA VOICE
(June 19, 2014),
http://blogs.fda.gov/fdavoice/index.php/2014/06/fda-leverages-big-data-via-cloud
-computing [https://perma.cc/DT6V-N5JK].





n92  See EPA's Cross-Agency Data Analytics and Visualization Program, U.S.
ENVTL. PROT. AGENCY, https://web.archive.org/web/20160414154548/
https://www.epa.gov/toxics-release-inventory-tri-program/epas-cross-agency-data-
analytics-and-visualization-program [https://perma.cc/P769-LGB6].





n93  Market Information Data Analytics System, U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM'N,
http://www.sec.gov/marketstructure/midas.html [https://perma.cc/2YYE-3LKN].





n94  Some academic research has already been conducted both to use
machine-learning algorithms to predict such trading violations and to call for
their use to make such predictions. See, e.g., Steve Donoho, Early Detection of
Insider Trading in Option Markets, Presented at the Proceedings of the Tenth ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2004);
Andrei A. Kirilenko & Andrew W. Lo, Moore's Law versus Murphy's Law: Algorithmic
Trading and Its Discontents, 27 J. ECON. PERSP. 51 (2013); Shawn Mankad et al.,
Discovering the Ecosystem of an Electronic Financial Market with a Dynamic
Machine-Learning Method, 2 ALGORITHMIC FIN. 151 (2013); Gregory Scopino,
Preparing Financial Regulation for the Second Machine Age: The Need for
Oversight of Digital Intermediaries in the Futures Markets, 2015 COLUM. BUS. L.
REV. 439, 443-44 (2015); see also Foresight: The Future of Computer Trading in
Financial Markets, GOV'T OFF. FOR SCI. 42 (2012),
http://www.cftc.gov/idc/groups/public/@aboutcftc/documents/file/tacfuturecompute
rtrading1012.pdf [https://perma.cc/NW9Z-EXGG].





n95  See, e.g., David R. Baker, L.A. Gas Leak Plugged, but California Pipelines
Regularly Leak, S.F. CHRON. (Feb. 14, 2016),
http://www.sfchronicle.com/business/article/L-A-gas-leak-plugged-but-California-
pipelines-6830717.php [https://perma.cc/6HQA-X6FU]; Deirdre Fulton, More Than
300 a Year: New Analysis Shows Devastating Impact of Pipeline Spills, COMMON
DREAMS (Nov. 17, 2014),
http://www.commondreams.org/news/2014/11/17/more-300-year-new-analysis-shows-dev
astating-impact-pipeline-spills [https://perma.cc/L7MN-S7UH].





n96  RICK KOWALEWSKI & PEG YOUNG, BUREAU OF TRANSP. STATISTICS, SR-010,
DATA-DRIVEN RISK MODELS COULD HELP TARGET PIPELINE SAFETY INSPECTIONS 3-4
(2008), http://www.rita.dot.gov/
bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/publications/special_reports_and_issue_briefs/s
pecial_report/2008_010/pdf/entire.pdf [https://perma.cc/4825-D39L].





n97  See, e.g., Ambient Air Monitoring, U.S. ENVTL. PROT. AGENCY,
https://www.epa.gov/air-quality-management-process/ambient-air-monitoring
[https://perma.cc/GQ2N-SYJE].





n98  Cf. Suzanne Goldenberg, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill: Underwater Robots
Trying to Seal Well, GUARDIAN (Apr. 26, 2010, 2:31 PM),
http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/apr/26/deepwater-horizon-spill-under
water-robots [https://perma.cc/NAC5-RGKX].





n99  Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 831 (1985) (noting that the Supreme Court
has recognized that "an agency's decision not to prosecute or enforce, whether
through civil or criminal process, is a decision generally committed to an
agency's absolute discretion").





n100  In addition to New York City's use of machine learning to determine where
to send its building inspectors, the City of Chicago is using algorithms to
allocate food safety inspectors, Mohana Ravindranath, In Chicago, Food
Inspectors Are Guided by Big Data, WASH. POST (Sept. 28, 2014),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/on-it/in-chicago-food-inspectors-are-gui
ded-by-big-data/2014/09/27/96be8c68-44e0-11e4-b47c-f5889e061e5f_story.html
[https://perma.cc/V25Y-53CG].





n101  We recognize, of course, that it might be possible for agencies to abuse
their discretion, which is why we characterize uses of machine learning for
discretionary purposes to be virtually unproblematic. See, e.g., 5 U.S.C. § 706
(2)(A) (2012). One way that such discretion could possibly be abused would be if
it were to be deployed in an unlawfully discriminatory fashion. In Section II.C,
we consider whether the use of machine learning even in discretionary
enforcement allocation decisions might offend equal protection.





n102  Adjudication and rulemaking, of course, are the two canonical types of
actions that agencies may take under the Administrative Procedure Act. 5 U.S.C.
§ 551(5), (7) (2012). We have labeled these two types of administrative action
as "non-discretionary" not because agencies are mandated to take these actions
(although sometimes they can be). Rather, we have labeled them this way because
these actions will be surrounded by "law to apply" that will subject these
actions to judicial review under the Administrative Procedure Act. Citizens to
Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402 (1971). By "discretionary" in Table
1, we mean simply that an action is "committed to agency discretion" and thus
not subject to judicial review. 5 U.S.C. § 701(a)(2). We do recognize, of
course, that on occasion there may be law to apply even to supportive uses of
analytic techniques or to the use of other factors that support decisions, such
as would be the case if a statute were to prohibit an agency from using machine
learning in even a non-determinative role. Cf. Whitman v. American Trucking
Assocs., Inc., 531 U.S. 457 (2001) (holding that the Clean Air Act prohibits the
EPA Administrator from considering costs when setting air quality standards).
For these reasons, Table 1 should be viewed simply as a heuristic intended to
illustrate some generalizations about the administrative state.





n103  Imagination may not be required for much longer. IBM is currently
developing machine-learning algorithms to predict smog levels in China,
predictions that may soon be used to determine governmental shutdowns of
factories or limits on traffic volumes. Will Knight, Can Machine Learning Help
Lift China's Smog?, MIT TECH. REV. (Mar. 28, 2016),
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/600993/can-machine-learning-help-lift-chinas-
smog/ [https://perma.cc/SL77-VJVK].






n104  Currently, such forward-looking adjudicatory decisions like licensing are
based on rules, making the issue one of whether applicants comply with the
applicable rule, or the criteria contained in a rule, and thus qualify to
receive a license. Machine learning makes an alternative adjudicatory framework
possible, one that considers forecasted risk based on an algorithmic analysis of
potentially hundreds of variables. Machine learning has been shown to be an
effective tool in making certain forward-looking adjudicatory decisions in the
criminal law system. Richard A. Berk et al., Forecasting Domestic Violence: A
Machine Learning Approach to Help Inform Arraignment Decisions, 13 J. EMPIRICAL
L. STUD. 94, 110 (2016) [hereinafter Berk, Forecasting Domestic Violence]; Berk
et al., supra note 50, at 208.





n105  See supra note 94.





n106  For a discussion of how predictions of systemic risk can affect rulemaking
by regulatory agencies, see Dimitrios Bisias et al., A Survey of Systemic Risk
Analytics 2, 10-11 (U.S. Dep't of the Treasury Office of Fin. Research, Working
Paper No. 0001, 2012),
https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/wsr/ofr/Documents/OFRwp0001_BisiasFloodLoVa
lavanis_ASurveyOfSystemicRiskAnalytics.pdf [https://perma.cc/D8LJ-8EYJ].





n107  The notice-and-comment process, and the good cause exception to it, is
provided at 5 U.S.C. § 553 (2012). It is important to recognize that we have
adopted a formulation of algorithm-created rules resembling that of rules as
they exist today; an algorithm would promulgate rules specifying a particular
course of action, a particular safety standard, a particular acceptable
emissions level, or so forth. Under this formulation, any changes to an
algorithm that result in a different prescription, including merely re-running
the algorithm as specified on new data, would necessitate a new rulemaking
process, absent a good cause exemption. But, because machine learning is likely
to be of most utility when engaged to regulate dynamic, time-sensitive
environments, it is probable that such an exemption could often or even
categorically be claimed. An alternative formulation might be one in which rules
state merely that an algorithm will be used to promulgate prescriptions
continuously; instead of a rule reciting a particular course of action or safety
standard on the basis of algorithmic output, the rule would say that a future
algorithm will run continuously and be updated dynamically to decide the
appropriate course of action or safety standard in the future. Cf. Coglianese,
supra note 25, at 370-71 (noting the possibility of "a reconceptualization of
the form in which rules are promulgated"). Such a formulation probably would not
necessitate that a new rulemaking be commenced whenever the algorithm is
updated, but it might be legally problematic given the need for reason-giving
and transparency. See infra Section II.D.





n108  Already agencies use digital tools to sort and identify duplicates in
comments submitted in rulemaking proceedings that have generated large volumes
of public submissions. See, e.g., Jane E. Fountain, Prospects for Improving the
Regulatory Process Using E-Rulemaking, 46 COMMC'NS ACM 63, 63-64 (2003)
(discussing federal agency use of automated tools to sort comments beginning as
early as 1997). Similar programs are now capable of processing data and
automatically writing prose, at least for now in the context of sports reports
and fiction. See Ian Crouch, The Sportswriting Machine, NEW YORKER (Mar. 26,
2015), http://www.newyorker.com/news/sporting-scene/the-sportswriting-machine
[https://perma.cc/25FB-UBFS]; Matt McFarland, A Computer Program Is Writing New
'Friends' Episodes. Are They Any Good?, WASH. POST (Jan. 21, 2016),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2016/01/21/a-computer-program
-is-writing-new-friends-episodes-are-they-any-good/
[https://perma.cc/57FC-UY86]. By itself, an algorithm might not be capable of
writing the entire content of a final rule document, as sections such as the
summary would presumably require a nuanced explanation of the background of a
rule and its purposes, and natural language processing cannot generate such
complete thoughts de novo. Natural language processing could, however, probably
write sections of a rule document that require statements of facts. Such
algorithms can rely on previous examples of how factual statements are worded to
create sentences that describe new facts in a fill-in-the-blank manner. Other
sections of rule documents require human input related to the goal of a
potential rule, but such sections could plausibly be written in advance by
humans and then the rest could be filled in with algorithm-written content.





n109  See Cary Coglianese, Engaging Business in the Regulation of
Nanotechnology, in GOVERNING UNCERTAINTY: ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION IN THE AGE OF
NANOTECHNOLOGY 46, 50-51 (Christopher J. Bosso ed., 2010).





n110  See BERK, supra note 33, at 9-17. This difficulty also often faces even
conventional techniques in attempting to claim causal inference. See Richard A.
Berk et al., What You Can Learn from Wrong Causal Models, in HANDBOOK OF CAUSAL
ANALYSIS FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH 403, 422-23 (Stephen L. Morgan ed., 2013).





n111  CARY COGLIANESE, MEASURING REGULATORY PERFORMANCE: EVALUATING THE IMPACT
OF REGULATION AND REGULATORY POLICY, OECD Expert Paper No. 1 (Aug. 2012),
http://www.oecd.org/gov/regulatory-policy/1_coglianese%20web.pdf
[https://perma.cc/6ZZZ-NERP].





n112  For incorporation of machine learning into ABM, see, for example, W. Rand,
Machine Learning Meets Agent-Based Modeling: When Not to Go to a Bar 2
(Northwestern Univ. Working Paper, 2006),
https://ccl.northwestern.edu/papers/agent2006rand.pdf
[https://perma.cc/SU6T-AB9V]. For use of machine learning in MAS, see Lucian
Busoniu et al., A Comprehensive Survey of Multiagent Reinforcement Learning, 38
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS, PART C: APPLICATIONS AND
REVIEWS 156, 156 (2008).





n113  For a more formal definition of ABM, see Nigel Gilbert, Agent-Based
Models, in 153 QUANTITATIVE APPLICATIONS IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES (John Fox ed.,
2008).





n114  For a more formal definition of MAS, see Busoniu et al., supra note 112,
at 156.





n115  See, e.g., Marek Laskowski, A Prototype Agent Based Model and Machine
Learning Hybrid System for Healthcare Decision Support, in DIGITAL ADVANCES IN
MEDICINE, E-HEALTH, AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES 230, 231 (2013).





n116  Id. at 235-36.





n117  See generally CHARLES PERROW, NORMAL ACCIDENTS: LIVING WITH HIGH-RISK
TECHNOLOGIES (2d ed. 1999).





n118  W. Brian Arthur et al., Comment Letter to Elizabeth M. Murphy on File
Number S7-02010 "Concept Release on Equity Market Structure" (Apr. 16, 2010),
https://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-02-10/s70210-109.pdf
[https://perma.cc/GTE3-W2M8].





n119  A further concern widely aired in discussions of big data and machine
learning centers on privacy. Privacy concerns are not trivial, but we do not
take them up in detail here in part because they have been widely considered
elsewhere. See, e.g., Kate Crawford & Jason Schultz, Big Data and Due Process:
Toward a Framework to Redress Predictive Privacy Harms, 55 B.C. L. REV. 93, 96
(2014); Roger Allan Ford & W. Nicholson Price II, Privacy and Accountability in
Black-Box Medicine, 23 MICH. TELECOMM. & TECH. L. REV. 1, 3-4 (2016); Paul Ohm,
Sensitive Information, 88 S. CAL. L. REV. 1125, 1170-71 (2015); Neil M. Richards
& Jonathan H. King, Big Data Ethics, 49 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 393, 395-97 (2014);
Neil M. Richards & Jonathan H. King, Three Paradoxes of Big Data, 66 STAN. L.
REV. ONLINE 41, 42-43 (2013); Omer Tene & Jules Polonetsky, Privacy in the Age
of Big Data: A Time for Big Decisions, 64 STAN. L. REV. ONLINE 63, 65 (2012). We
also do not focus on privacy concerns because they are not unique to
administrative agencies' use of machine learning. Our principal concern here is
with issues that are distinctively applicable to the use of machine learning in
the administrative state. Furthermore, many of machine learning's privacy
implications could be more accurately characterized as implications of the use
of big data; although algorithms themselves may make possible new kinds of
inferences, this ability is manifested only in large data sets, so the
underlying privacy problems that others have flagged appear to have been raised
more by the collection of big data than by the use of machine-learning
algorithms per se.





n120  Note that this limited "autonomy" also implies, given our description of
how machine learning operates, the potential for algorithms to yield unexpected,
seemingly original outcomes. Also, although we have chosen to use and qualify
the term "autonomy," other legal literature on robotics refers, with good
reason, to similarly limited independence as "emergence." See, e.g., Ryan Calo,
Robotics and the Lessons of Cyberlaw, 103 CAL. L. REV. 513, 539-40 (2015).





n121  See Markoff, supra note 14.





n122  U.S. CONST. art. 1, § 1.





n123  A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495, 505 (1935).





n124  Executive exercise of legislative authority by administrative agencies
must conform to statutory provisions. See Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,
343 U.S. 579, 585 (1952) ("The President's power, if any, to issue the order
must stem from an act of Congress or from the Constitution itself.").





n125  Cuéllar, supra note 25. This first scenario is important to focus on also
because it turns out ultimately to be where the statutory interpretation
question raised by the second scenario leads. If a court were to conclude that a
statute either authorized, or at least did not preclude, agencies to subdelegate
to machines, the question then would still arise whether the Constitution
permits Congress to delegate authority in such a way that allows agencies to
delegate further to machine-learning algorithms.





n126  Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons, 67 U. CHI. L. REV. 315, 322
(2000). The Supreme Court has struck down legislation under the nondelegation
doctrine on only a couple of occasions--and only during the New Deal. Id.





n127  J.W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United States, 276 U.S. 394, 409 (1928).





n128  Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 372 (1989).





n129  Id. See also Opp Cotton Mills, Inc. v. Adm'r, 312 U.S. 126, 145 (1941).





n130  Am. Power & Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U.S. 90, 105 (1946); see also Yakus v.
United States, 321 U.S. 414, 424-25 (1944).





n131  See, e.g., Nat'l Broad. Co., Inc. v. United States, 319 U.S. 190, 225-26
(1943).





n132  Carter v. Carter Coal Co., 298 U.S. 238, 311 (1936); see also Dep't of
Transp. v. Ass'n of Am. R.Rs., 135 S. Ct. 1225, 1231 (2015); A.L.A. Schechter
Poultry Corp., 295 U.S. 495, 537 (1935).





n133  See, e.g., George J. Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, 2 BELL J.
ECON. & MGMT. SCI. 3, 3-7 (1971). Arguably, the constitutional prohibition on
delegation of rulemaking power to private entities emanates as much from due
process considerations as from strictly nondelegation concerns. See, e.g.,
Alexander Volokh, The Shadow Debate Over Private Nondelegation in DOT v.
Association of American Railroads, 2015 CATO SUP. CT. REV. 359, 393 (2015)
(pointing to "the fundamental unfairness of putting the regulation of an
industry in the hands of an entity that has a profit-making interest in the
outcome of the regulation").





n134  Sunshine Anthracite Coal Co. v. Adkins, 310 U.S. 381, 399 (1940); see
also, e.g., Currin v. Wallace, 306 U.S. 1, 15 (1939).





n135  See, e.g., Ass'n of Am. R.Rs. v. Dep't of Transp., 721 F.3d 666, 671 (D.C.
Cir. 2013) ("Congress may formalize the role of private parties in proposing
regulations so long as that role is merely 'as an aid' to a government agency
that retains the discretion to 'approve[], disapprove[], or modif[y]' them."
(quoting Sunshine Anthracite Coal Co., 310 U.S. at 388)); Pittston Co. v. United
States, 368 F.3d 385, 396 (4th Cir. 2004) ("These powers given to the Trustees
are of an administrative or advisory nature, and delegation of them to the
Trustees does not, we conclude, violate the nondelegation doctrine."); United
States v. Frame, 885 F.2d 1119, 1129 (3d Cir. 1989) ("In essence, the
Cattlemen's Board and the Operating Committee serve an advisory function . . .
.").





n136  See supra Section I.B.





n137  Cf. Cary Coglianese, Presidential Control of Administrative Agencies: A
Debate over Law or Politics?, 12 U. PA. J. CONST. L. 637, 646 (2010); Cary
Coglianese, The Emptiness of Decisional Limits: Reconceiving Presidential
Control of the Administrative State, 69 ADMIN. L. REV. 43 (2017).





n138  373 F.3d 372, 387 (3d Cir. 2004). Specifically, Arbitron's measurements of
radio station markets informed the legal limit on the number of radio stations
within one market that may be owned by the same entity. See id.





n139  Id. at 425.





n140  Now-judge David Barron and now-Justice Elena Kagan have argued that the
presence of an intra-agency subdelegation should affect the level of deference
given to agency actions. David J. Barron & Elena Kagan, Chevron's Nondelegation
Doctrine, 2001 SUP. CT. REV. 201 (2001). Specifically, they proposed that
interpretations authorized by agency leaders who also take responsibility for
rules they personally authorize should be given Chevron deference, whereas
interpretations made by lower-level employees should receive only more limited
Skidmore deference. They argued that political accountability and thorough
decision making are more likely to arise when high-level, appointed agency
members have a significant hand in the rulemaking process. If courts followed
their approach in cases challenging a subdelegation to a machine-learning
system, perhaps such a system should receive additional scrutiny when only
low-level agency members specify the objective functions and other normative
choices embedded in the algorithms. Furthermore, although such an approach would
calibrate deference based on a hierarchy of the human decision makers specifying
the algorithms, an alternative application of Barron and Kagan's proposal might
not start with the assumption that the decision makers are indeed humans.
Rather, as Associate Justice Cuéllar has written, courts might view the
algorithms themselves as the decision makers and give deference accordingly. See
Cuéllar, supra note 25, at 17-19. He also rightfully acknowledges, though, that
such "policing the line between automated decision and decisions support is
difficult." Id. at 18.





n141  Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837 (1984).





n142  See United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 227 (2001) ("When Congress
has 'explicitly left a gap for an agency to fill, there is an express delegation
of authority to the agency to elucidate a specific provision of the statute by
regulation,' and any ensuing regulation is binding in the courts unless
procedurally defective, arbitrary or capricious in substance, or manifestly
contrary to the statute." (quoting Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44) (citations
omitted)).





n143  See, e.g., Ronald A. Cass, Vive la Deference?: Rethinking the Balance
Between Administrative and Judicial Discretion, 83 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 1294,
1319-26 (2015).





n144  Bi-Metallic Inv. Co. v. State Bd. of Equalization, 239 U.S. 441, 445-46
(1915) (suggesting that a right to be heard is necessary when a "relatively
small number of persons [is] concerned, who [are] exceptionally affected, in
each case upon individual grounds," but not in instances of adoption of
widely-applicable rules); Londoner v. Denver, 210 U.S. 373, 386 (1908)
("[S]omething more than [an opportunity to submit objections in writing], even
in proceedings for taxation, is required by due process of law. . . . [E]ven
here a hearing in its very essence demands that he who is entitled to it shall
have the right to support his allegations by argument however brief, and, if
need be, by proof, however informal."). See generally Edward L. Rubin, Due
Process and the Administrative State, 72 CAL. L. REV. 1044 (1984).





n145  See, e.g., Gen. Elec. Co. v. Jackson, 595 F. Supp. 2d 8, 21-29 (D.D.C.
2009).





n146  See, e.g., Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 323-25 (1976).





n147  Although we do not take up the possibility that machine-learning
algorithms could actually "conduct" adjudicatory hearings, we note the remote
possibility that advances in artificial intelligence may one day permit such
hearings. Cf. Judith Newman, To Siri, With Love, N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 17, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/19/fashion/how-apples-siri-became-one-autistic-bo
ys-bff.html [https://perma.cc/BF65-BH5G] (describing developmentally beneficial
"discussions" between Apple's digital assistant Siri and autistic children).





n148  397 U.S. 254, 264 (1970).





n149  Id. at 268 (finding unconstitutional procedures that "do not permit
recipients to appear personally with or without counsel before the official who
finally determines continued eligibility" and that do not allow recipients "to
present evidence to that official orally, or to confront or cross-examine
adverse witnesses").





n150  Id. at 269.





n151  424 U.S. 319, 348-49 (1976).





n152  Id. at 335.





n153  Id. at 334 (quoting Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481 (1972))
(internal quotation marks omitted).





n154  Cary Coglianese, Robot Regulators Could Eliminate Human Error, S.F. CHRON.
(May 5, 2016),
http://www.sfchronicle.com/opinion/article/Robot-regulators-could-eliminate-huma
n-error-7396749.php [https://perma.cc/WCH2-KNAB].





n155  See BERK, supra note 33, at 108-10. When predicting a binary outcome
variable, these error rates will represent false positives and false negatives,
and error rates from regression applications of machine learning will represent
overestimates or underestimates. See id.





n156  See, e.g., Gen. Elec. Co. v. Jackson, 595 F. Supp. 2d 8, 33 (D.D.C. 2009).





n157  424 U.S. 319, 346 n.29 (1976).





n158  Id. at 344-45.





n159  See, e.g., Gray Panthers v. Califano, 466 F. Supp. 1317, 1323 (D.D.C.
1979) (noting that an error rate of less than 1 percent "is a small fraction of
the 3.3% rate the Court in Mathews upheld as consistent with due process").





n160  Gen. Elec. Co., 595 F. Supp. 2d at 37 (quoting Shands v. Tull, 602 F.2d
1156, 1160 (3d Cir. 1979)).





n161  Id. at 38.





n162  Humphries v. County of Los Angeles, 554 F.3d 1170, 1195 (9th Cir. 2008),
rev'd on other grounds sub nom. Los Angeles County v. Humphries, 562 U.S. 29
(2010).





n163  White v. Mathews, 434 F. Supp. 1252, 1255 n.12 (D. Conn. 1976).





n164  Humphries, 554 F.3d at 1195.





n165  595 F. Supp. 2d at 37 (referencing Dupuy v. Samuels, 397 F.3d 493, 505,
512 (7th Cir. 2005)).





n166  Markadonatos v. Village of Woodridge, 739 F.3d 984, 1001 (7th Cir. 2014)
(Hamilton, J., dissenting).





n167  Graves v. Meystrik, 425 F. Supp. 40, 48-49 (E.D. Mo. 1977).





n168  Atkins v. Parker, 472 U.S. 115, 151 (1985) (Brennan, J. dissenting)
(citing Foggs v. Block, 722 F.2d 933, 939 (1st Cir. 1983) (finding an error rate
of 585 households out of 5,013 households, or 11.67 percent)).





n169  Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 347 (1976).





n170  Id. at 346 n.29.





n171  Perhaps it is for this reason that the Mathews Court noted that, "[b]are
statistics rarely provide a satisfactory measure of the fairness of a
decisionmaking process." Id. at 346.





n172  An agency could conceivably bias an algorithm in deliberate ways that
could be exposed on appeal. In many machine-learning algorithms, it is possible
for an agency to set the algorithm's cost ratio, or the preferred ratio of false
positives to false negatives, which in turn affects the corresponding error
rates. See BERK, supra note 33, at 139-45. Thus, an agency could potentially
bias an algorithm to, for example, have more error when predicting that someone
should be deprived than when predicting that someone should not be denied if the
agency views not depriving someone as less costly than the pre-deprivation
hearing that would be necessary if that individual were deprived. Outside of the
administrative context, previous scholarship has discussed the difficulties
faced in uncovering similar hidden biases and value choices in algorithms
applied to criminal justice. See Andrea Roth, Trial by Machine, 104 GEO. L.J.
1245, 1269-76 (2016).





n173  One may contend that the kind of evidence that must be provided to rectify
errors relates to the underlying matter of fact in dispute and not to the method
by which that underlying matter is estimated. As previously discussed, however,
machine learning will often be applied to make predictions about risks not
capable of being directly evidenced; if PHMSA orders the shutdown of a pipeline,
for instance, the issue disputed at a hearing will be whether that pipeline
indeed posed a risk for future failure, and the kind of physical evidence that
could be presented at the hearing may not be capable of demonstrating the
pipeline's lack of risk. Therefore, a pipeline operator in such a hearing will
have to provide evidence instead about the potential sources of error in the
algorithm that was used initially to predict the risk.





n174  Outside the context of adjudicatory algorithms, previous scholarship has
emphasized the need for individuals to be able to challenge automated decisions
rendered by corporate entities' algorithms, such as those engaged in credit
scoring. See generally Danielle Keats Citron & Frank Pasquale, The Scored
Society: Due Process for Automated Predictions, 89 WASH. L. REV. 1 (2014); Tom
Baker & Benedict G.C. Dellaert, Regulating Robo Advice Across the Financial
Services Industry, 103 IOWA L. REV. (forthcoming 2017).





n175  Courts have held that counsel may be required for individuals who lack the
abilities to present their case due to factors like low educational attainment
or mental handicap. See, e.g., Smith v. Sec'y of Health, Educ., & Welfare, 587
F.2d 857, 860-61 (7th Cir. 1978) (per curiam); Alamo v. Richardson, 355 F. Supp.
314, 316-17 (D.P.R. 1972). An alternative to providing counsel can be requiring
that the body administering the hearing effectively serve as counsel. See Gold
v. Sec'y of Health, Educ., & Welfare, 463 F.2d 38, 43 (2d Cir. 1972).





n176  See, e.g., U.S. FED. AVIATION ADMIN., UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AVIATION
RULEMAKING COMMITTEE (2011),
https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/rulemaking/committees/documents/media/U
ASARC-6172011.PDF [https://perma.cc/UQ4L-DTE5]. General procedures for advisory
committees are provided by the Federal Advisory Committee Act §§ 1-16, 5 U.S.C.
app. 2 (2012). In addition, the Office of Management and Budget has established
guidelines for peer review. Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review,
70 Fed. Reg. 2,664 (Jan. 14, 2005).





n177  See, e.g., Berk, Forecasting Domestic Violence, supra note 104; Kriegler &
Berk, supra note 51.





n178  See supra note 104.





n179  Imagine, for instance, that for a given protected attribute a data set
contains information about two classes of individuals. One class is larger and
has, on average, more "advantageous" outcomes in terms of the output variable,
however defined. The other class is smaller and has, on average, less
advantageous outcomes. If an algorithm were ignorant of or blind to the class
identities of individuals in this data set, the algorithm would generate one
classification rule that would generally perform more accurately for the
majority class (simply because it is larger), causing less accurate predictions
for the minority class. If, however, this algorithm explicitly took into account
individuals' class memberships, it could generate two different classification
rules, one for each class, allowing for more accurate predictions overall and,
most pertinently, for the minority class. There may, of course, be instances in
which the increases in overall accuracy and decreases in accuracy disparities
are negligible. Particularly, nearly equally accurate predictions may result in
data sets lacking class-related variables but containing many other variables
that are highly correlated with class membership, provided that the data set is
sufficiently large. See Solon Barocas & Andrew D. Selbst, Big Data's Disparate
Impact, 104 CAL. L. REV. 671, 695 (2016). This finding may naturally prompt the
question of whether including such proxy variables capable of recapitulating
class membership raises equal protection concerns, and, indeed, this question
has been considered outside the context of algorithmic decision making. See
generally Sonja B. Starr, Evidence-Based Sentencing and the Scientific
Rationalization of Discrimination, 66 STAN. L. REV. 803 (2014). We do not
address proxy variables in any depth in this Article because, as will be seen,
the reasoning underlying our conclusion about class-related variables
necessarily yields the same conclusion for sets of proxy variables.





n180  U.S. EXEC. OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG DATA: SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES,
PRESERVING VALUES 45 (2014),
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/big_data_privacy_report_may_1
_2014.pdf [https://perma.cc/T7AN-BU8P]. Similar concerns over the potential for
discrimination when algorithms are applied to big data have also been voiced in
the press. See, e.g., Katherine Noyes, Will Big Data Help End Discrimination--or
Make It Worse?, FORTUNE (Jan. 15, 2015, 3:16 PM),
http://fortune.com/2015/01/15/will-big-data-help-end-discrimination-or-make-it-w
orse [https://perma.cc/8PPY-7Y3A]; Michael Schrage, Big Data's Dangerous New Era
of Discrimination, HARV. BUS. REV. (Jan. 29, 2014),
https://hbr.org/2014/01/big-datas-dangerous-new-era-of-discrimination
[https://perma.cc/Y7MEHYLN].





n181  Although the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause prohibits
discrimination by the states, the Warren Court held that the concepts of due
process and equal protection "are not mutually exclusive" and that
"discrimination may be so unjustifiable as to be violative of" the Fifth
Amendment's Due Process clause. Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497, 499 (1954).
Accordingly, analysis of discrimination claims under the Fifth Amendment mirrors
that of equal protection analysis under the Fourteenth Amendment, and much of
the case law we discuss in this Part arises under the latter provision of the
Constitution.





n182  Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (1976).





n183  Id. (quoting Akins v. Texas, 325 U.S. 398, 403-04 (1945)).





n184  Racial discrimination, for instance, is subject to strict scrutiny review.
See, e.g., Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200, 213 (1995).
Disparate treatment on the basis of sex, however, is generally considered
subject to intermediate scrutiny. See, e.g., Miss. Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458
U.S. 718, 724 (1982); Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 218 (1976) (Rehnquist, J.,
dissenting).





n185  See, e.g., Adarand Constructors, Inc., 515 U.S. at 235; Craig, 429 U.S. at
197; United States v. Carolene Prods. Co., 304 U.S. 144, 152 n.4 (1938).





n186  It should be made clear that the use of "classification" to refer to the
goal of a machine-learning algorithm must be disentangled from its use to refer
to how the race-related information is treated within an algorithm. Scholars
have suggested that, because a machine-learning algorithm has classification as
its goal, the inclusion of class-related variables in such an algorithm
necessarily renders it a legally harmful suspect classification. Barocas &
Selbst, supra note 179, at 695. As our subsequent discussions will show,
however, what matters for determining the level of judicial scrutiny is not just
whether the goal of a government decision-making process is classificatory in
overall nature, but whether within that process individuals are classified by
their class memberships, such that being a member of one class is advantageous
or disadvantageous when compared to being a member of another class.





n187  See Stephen Menendian, What Constitutes a "Racial Classification"?: Equal
Protection Doctrine Scrutinized, 24 TEMP. POL. & C.R. L. REV. 81, 82 (2014)
("The Supreme Court has, to date, not provided a definition of the term 'racial
classification.' Increasingly a term of art, the Court has not always been
careful about its usage or consistent in its application." (citations omitted));
Reva B. Siegel, Equality Talk: Antisubordination and Anticlassification Values
in Constitutional Struggles Over Brown, 117 HARV. L. REV. 1470, 1542 (2004)
("American antidiscrimination law has no determinate criteria for deciding what
practices are group-based classifications, and while courts sometimes articulate
such criteria, they often apply them inconsistently."); Marcy Strauss,
Reevaluating Suspect Classifications, 35 SEATTLE U. L. REV. 135, 138 (2011)
("The Supreme Court has not provided a coherent explanation for precisely what
factors trigger heightened scrutiny.").





n188  See, e.g., Bolling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497, 499 (1954).





n189  See, e.g., Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244, 251-57 (2003); Grutter v.
Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 312-16 (2003).





n190  Indeed, scholars have sometimes made this claim. For example, Sonja Starr
stated that, in the 2013 iteration of Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin,
"the Supreme Court . . . applied heightened constitutional scrutiny to the mere
consideration of constitutionally suspect factors" in the university's
undergraduate admissions process. Starr, supra note 179, at 864 (discussing
Fisher v. Univ. of Tex. at Austin, 133 S. Ct. 2411 (2013)).





n191  See Menendian, supra note 187, at 91-95; Stephen M. Rich, Inferred
Classifications, 99 VA. L. REV. 1525, 1579-86 (2013).





n192  Menendian, supra note 187, at 102 (citations omitted).





n193  Going forward, we discuss categorically different treatment of class
membership in contexts where one class is advantaged--it is awarded benefits or
allowed to avoid burdens--and another is disadvantaged. But the underlying
conceptual formulation of categorically different treatment also applies to
instances in which the attached benefits or burdens of governmental treatment
are less evident. Take, for instance, Johnson v. California, which concerned the
assignment of prisoners only to cells with cell mates of the same race; no
prisoners of particular races were burdened any more than others, but the Court
explicitly stated that allowing this action to escape strict scrutiny "ignores
our repeated command that 'racial classifications receive close scrutiny even
when they may be said to burden or benefit the races equally.'" Johnson v.
California, 543 U.S. 499, 506 (2005) (quoting Shaw v. Reno, 509 U.S. 630, 651
(1993)). It should be clear, though, that this assignment of prisoners by race
nonetheless involved categorically different treatment, even if not
categorically different allocation of burdens or benefits; all prisoners of a
given race were assigned to certain cells, whereas all prisoners of another race
were assigned to different cells. Id. at 502 ("In fact, the CDC has admitted
that the chances of an inmate being assigned a cellmate of another race are
'[p]retty close' to zero percent." (citations omitted)).





n194  Gratz, 539 U.S. at 266.





n195  See Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 318-20 (2003). A similarly
holistic admissions process was the subject of Fisher v. University of Texas at
Austin; when considered, underrepresented minority status was categorically
given preference over non-minority status to remedy the university's lack of "a
'critical mass' of minority students." Fisher, 133 S. Ct. at 2416.





n196  Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267, 273-74 (1986) (plurality
opinion).





n197  Parents Involved in Cmty. Schs. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701,
709-17 (2007).





n198  448 U.S. 448, 491 (1980) (plurality opinion).





n199  476 U.S. at 273-74.





n200  133 S. Ct. at 2417.





n201  Id. (quoting Regents of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 295 (1978)
(plurality opinion)).





n202  GEOFFREY R. STONE ET AL., CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 498 (7th ed. 2013) (stating
suspect classifications are those where "the government has drawn [a] line
between . . . favored and disfavored groups").





n203  See supra Section I.A.





n204  Furthermore, even if one nonetheless believed that consistent, homogenous
effects of class membership had resulted, determining so would be impossible due
to the inability to open the black box and see exactly what functional forms
have resulted and exactly how variables have interacted. In other words, even if
all members of a class were ex post subjected to the same outcome or treated in
one manner, it would be difficult to conclude that this was because of the
inclusion of class-related variables in the algorithmic analysis. If even an
algorithm's designers cannot know how class-related variables might be affecting
the outcomes, we find it hard to imagine a court could determine that a
government agency that relied on such an algorithm to obtain more accurate
predictions was intentionally discriminating on the basis of a protected class.





n205  Parents Involved in Cmty. Schs. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701,
788-89 (2007) (Kennedy, J., concurring) ("[School authorities] are free to
devise race-conscious measures to address the problem [of diversity] in a
general way and without treating each student in different fashion solely on the
basis of a systematic, individual typing by race. . . . These mechanisms are
race conscious but do not lead to different treatment based on a classification
that tells each student he or she is to be defined by race, so it is unlikely
any of them would demand strict scrutiny to be found permissible.").





n206  The need for clearer recognition of the difference between classification
and explicit consideration seems more than just theoretical. For example, as
others have noted, in his opinion in Parents Involved, Chief Justice Roberts
appears to use "race-conscious" synonymously with "racial classification." Rich,
supra note 191, at 1571 n.239.





n207  Such circumstantial evidence may include "historical background of the
decision," the sequence of events leading up to the decision, the extent to
which there is a departure from normal procedures, and the legislative history
tracking deliberations by decision makers. Village of Arlington Heights v.
Metro. Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 267-68 (1977).





n208  Id. at 267.





n209  The Court has also allowed such foreseeability of disparate impact to
serve as circumstantial evidence of discriminatory intent. See, e.g., Columbus
Bd. of Educ. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449, 464 (1979); Pers. Adm'r of Mass. v.
Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 278-79 (1979).





n210  See supra Part I.





n211  Some machine-learning algorithms are capable of producing a type of output
called partial dependence plots, which show the average functional (albeit not
causal) relationship between a given predictor variable and the outcome holding
all other variables constant. See, e.g., D. Richard Cutler et al., Random
Forests for Classification in Ecology, 88 ECOLOGY 2783 (2007). These plots do
not, however, give one any insight into the effect of a given variable on the
disparity of the ultimate classifications.





n212  Even in such a scenario, one could not know whether it was indeed the
inclusion of a given variable that produced the differences in disparity due to
the stochastic nature of many machinelearning algorithms. That being said, if
one's data set is sufficiently large and does not contain much noise, then one
should not expect significantly different outcomes between iterations of an
algorithm. Thus, if one were to observe that algorithms including a given
variable resulted in significantly disparate impacts, then it could perhaps be
assumed that the variable was responsible. However, this is data-dependent,
making its likelihood difficult to quantify.





n213  See BERK, supra note 33, at 31.





n214  To survive intermediate scrutiny, intentionally discriminatory processes
must serve "important governmental objectives." Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190,
197 (1976). Under strict scrutiny, "classification[s] 'must be justified by a
compelling governmental interest.'" Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S.
267, 274 (1986) (plurality opinion) (quoting Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429,
432 (1984)).





n215  United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996).





n216  See Starr, supra note 179.





n217  Starr, supra note 179, at 827.





n218  See supra Section I.A.





n219  See supra Section I.A.





n220  Kenji Yoshino, The New Equal Protection, 124 HARV. L. REV. 747, 755-56
(2011). By contrast, strict scrutiny has been famously described as being
"'strict' in theory and fatal in fact." Gerald Gunther, The Supreme Court, 1971
Term--Foreword: In Search of Evolving Doctrine on a Changing Court: A Model for
a Newer Equal Protection, 86 HARV. L. REV. 1, 8 (1972).





n221  Mass. Bd. of Ret. v. Murgia, 427 U.S. 307, 312 (1976) (per curiam).





n222  See Susannah W. Pollvogt, Unconstitutional Animus, 81 FORDHAM L. REV. 887,
889 (2012).





n223  See id. at 924-30; Susannah W. Pollvogt, Windsor, Animus, and the Future
of Marriage Equality, 113 COLUM. L. REV. SIDEBAR 204, 205-06 (2013).





n224  Pollvogt, supra note 222, at 926-29.





n225  See, e.g., U.S. Dep't of Agric. v. Moreno, 413 U.S. 528, 534 (1973)
(discussing statements by legislators expressing a desire to exclude "hippies"
from food stamp programs).





n226  See, e.g., Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 433 (1984) (describing how a
court's decision to take custody away from a mother who remarried a man of a
different race gave effect to private biases against interracial marriages).





n227  Pollvogt, supra note 222, at 927 (discussing City of Cleburne v. Cleburne
Living Ctr., 473 U.S. 432 (1985)).





n228  It should also be noted, if the class in question is a constitutionally
suspect one, then a similar argument could perhaps be advanced to show
circumstantial evidence of discriminatory intent, as discussed earlier in this
section.






n229  See, e.g., Toshihiro Kamishima et al., Fairness-Aware Classifier with
Prejudice Remover Regularizer, in MACHINE LEARNING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN
DATABASES 35-50 (Peter A. Flach, Tijl De Bie & Nello Cristianini eds., 2012)
(describing an approach known as regularization, which is akin to mathematically
punishing the algorithm for making vastly disparate classifications); Sorelle
Friedler et al., Certifying and Removing Disparate Impact 10-11, Presented at
the NIPS workshop on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine
Learning (2014), http://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.3756v1.pdf
[https://perma.cc/Y967-BF56] (describing a data-altering approach to reduce
disparate outcomes by what amounts, roughly speaking, to adding noise to the
data).





n230  See Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009). In Ricci, the Court held
that, in the context of Title VII's prohibition of disparate impacts, decision
processes may be modified ex post to minimize their disparate impacts only if
the decision maker has a "strong basis in evidence to believe [the decision
maker] will be subject to disparate-impact liability if it fails to take the
race-conscious, discriminatory action." Id. at 585. Admittedly, this ruling does
not directly address the scenario we have raised in this Article, in which the
feared equal protection violation would result from a prohibition not of
disparate impacts but of animus. Nonetheless, the Court's general hesitancy to
allow ex post disparate treatment calls into question whether ex post
rectifications of an algorithm's disparate impacts would be permissible.





n231  In reaching this conclusion, we have noted several uncertainties that
exist, from a lack of clarity surrounding the meaning of "suspect
classification" to the uncertain acceptability of ex post modifications of
algorithms with disparate impacts. Such uncertainties are representative of the
broader ferment that has characterized, and continues to characterize, equal
protection doctrine, and it is in the context of this ferment that our
conclusion should be understood. Perhaps these difficulties in obtaining clarity
about the meaning of equal protection are not due to any easily rectifiable
inadequacies in law, but simply to the problem of defining, in a more normative
sense, what equality actually means. For example, many conceptions of equality
rest on the notion that "persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated
alike." F.S. Royster Guano Co. v. Virginia, 253 U.S. 412, 415 (1920). But some
scholarship has argued that such a statement is circular and devoid of any real
moral thrust; the only coherent way to define two individuals as "being alike"
may not be to say that they are alike in any empirical way, but to say that they
are morally alike, in that they should be treated alike. But then a
determination of who should be treated alike is external to equality and must be
derived from conceptions of rights or other moral principles. See Peter Westen,
The Empty Idea of Equality, 95 HARV. L. REV. 537, 543, 547 (1982). This
difficulty of defining equality has practical implications not only for
understanding equal protection doctrine but also for the ways that agencies
should implement machine learning to counter potential problems of unfairness.
Mathematical definitions of equality must be grounded in a moral definition of
equality to be responsive to moral concerns about discrimination. Cf. Sorelle A.
Friedler et al., On the (Im)possibility of Fairness, ARXIV:1609.07236 [CS.CY]
(2016), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.07236v1.pdf [https://perma.cc/225Y-LPAE]
(discussing how multiple quantitative measures of algorithmic fairness exist but
rely on unstated, and often incompatible, assumptions about fairness); Kory D.
Johnson et al., Impartial Predictive Modeling: Ensuring Fairness in Arbitrary
Models, ARXIV: 1608.00528 [STAT.ME] (2016),
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1608.00528v2.pdf [https://perma.cc/C5QW-RY2U] ("The
literature lacks a serious discussion of the philosophical components of
fairness and how they should be operationalized in statistics. Doing so will
require a spectrum of models to be defined, because fairness is a complicated
philosophical topic.").





n232  See Coglianese, supra note 154; see also Anupam Chander, The Racist
Algorithm?, 115 MICH. L. REV. (forthcoming 2017) (describing how discriminatory
effects of algorithms may result not from their black-box natures, which are
often more neutral than potentially biased human decision makers, but from
historical human biases baked into data sets). Human biases can manifest
themselves in qualitative decision making and in traditional quantitative
decision making, like regression analysis. Regression analysis is more
susceptible to tacit bias because it is driven by theories about how individuals
are likely to behave. A recent ProPublica report documents one form of disparate
impacts from a traditional risk assessment algorithm. See Julia Angwin et al.,
Machine Bias, PROPUBLICA (May 23, 2016),
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sen
tencing [https://perma.cc/VAF3-XQEV]. Although the exact nature of the COMPAS
algorithm at the center of the ProPublica report is proprietary and thus
publicly unavailable, it does not seem to be a modern machine-learning algorithm
but rather a "theory-guided instrument[]." Tim Brennan & William L. Oliver, The
Emergence of Machine Learning Techniques in Criminology: Implications of
Complexity in Our Data and in Research Questions, 12 CRIMINOLOGY & PUB. POL'Y
551, 559 (2013); see also Tim Brennan et al., Evaluating the Predictive Validity
of the COMPAS Risk and Needs Assessment System, 36 CRIM. JUST. & BEHAV. 21, 24
(2009) (noting how COMPAS models "use logistic regression, survival analysis,
and bootstrap classification methods").





n233  See, e.g., John Danaher, The Threat of Algocracy: Reality, Resistance and
Accommodation, 29 PHIL. & TECH. 245 (2016); Felten, supra note 20.





n234  Cary Coglianese, Heather Kilmartin & Evan Mendelson, Transparency and
Public Participation in the Federal Rulemaking Process: Recommendations for the
New Administration, 77 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 924, 926 (2009).





n235  5 U.S.C. § 552 (2012).





n236  Id. §§ 552-553.





n237  Nat'l Archives and Records Admin. v. Favish, 541 U.S. 157, 171 (2004)
(quoting Dep't of Justice v. Reporters Comm. for Freedom of the Press, 489 U.S.
749, 773 (1989)).





n238  Coglianese, Kilmartin & Mendelson, supra note 234, at 926.





n239  5 U.S.C. § 553(b)-(c).





n240  See id. § 552.





n241  See id. § 552(b).





n242  As statistician Leo Breiman has noted, "My biostatistician friends tell
me, 'Doctors can interpret logistic regression.' There is no way they can
interpret a black box containing fifty [classification] trees hooked together."
Breiman, supra note 42, at 209.





n243  See Cary Coglianese, The Transparency President? The Obama Administration
and Open Government, 22 GOVERNANCE 529, 537 (2009) (discussing the importance of
reasoned transparency that, unlike fishbowl transparency, demands explicit
explanations for agency action); Jerry L. Mashaw, Small Things Like Reasons Are
Put in a Jar: Reason and Legitimacy in the Administrative State, 70 FORDHAM L.
REV. 17, 19 (2001) (discussing how the legitimacy of administrative actions,
unlike legislative or judicial actions, must be grounded in reason).





n244  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29,
43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)).





n245  Id.





n246  Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.2d 298, 333 (D.C. Cir. 1981); see also Am.
Pub. Gas Ass'n v. Fed. Power Comm'n, 567 F.2d 1016, 1039 (D.C. Cir. 1977)
(noting that "the Commission is obligated to provide a complete analytical
defense of its model").





n247  Sierra Club, 657 F.2d at 334-35 ("The safety valves in the use of such
sophisticated methodology are the requirement of public exposure of the
assumptions and data incorporated into the analysis . . . and the insistence
that ultimate responsibility for the policy decision remains with the agency
rather than the computer. With these precautions the tools of econometric
computer analysis can intelligently broaden rather than constrain the
policymaker's options and avoid the 'artificial narrowing of options that [can
be] arbitrary and capricious.'" (quoting Pillai v. Civil Aeronautics Bd., 485
F.2d 1018, 1027 (D.C. Cir. 1973)) (footnote omitted)).





n248  See, e.g., Citizens to Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402,
415 (1971).





n249  Balt. Gas & Elec. Co. v. Nat'l Res. Def. Council, Inc., 462 U.S. 87, 103
(1983). As Adrian Vermeule has noted, "Baltimore Gas review is in fact more
consistent with Supreme Court practice in the past three decades than is State
Farm (at least in its inflated form, as 'hard look review')." Adrian Vermeule,
LAW'S ABNEGATION: FROM LAW'S EMPIRE TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE STATE 190 (2016); id.
(noting that "arbitrary and capricious review is thin.").





n250  Alaska v. Lubchenco, 825 F. Supp. 2d 209, 223 (D.D.C. 2011).





n251  Dow AgroSciences LLC v. Nat'l Marine Fisheries Serv., 821 F. Supp. 2d 792,
804 (D. Md. 2011) (footnote omitted).





n252  See Exec. Order No. 12,866, Regulatory Planning and Review, 58 Fed. Reg.
51,735 (Oct. 4, 1993); Exec. Order No. 13,563, Improving Regulation and
Regulatory Review, 76 Fed. Reg. 3821 (Jan. 21, 2011) ("[E]ach agency shall
ensure the objectivity of any scientific and technological information and
processes used to support the agency's regulatory actions.").





n253  44 U.S.C. § 3516 (2012).





n254  Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility,
and Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies; Republication, 67
Fed. Reg. 8,452, 8,458 (Feb. 22, 2002). These guidelines, though, are not
legally binding. See Harkonen v. U.S. Dep't of Justice, 800 F.3d 1143, 1145 (9th
Cir. 2015) (holding that the Information Quality Act does not create any legal
right to agency information or to its quality).





n255  OFFICE OF INFO. AND REGULATORY AFFAIRS, REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS: A
PRIMER 3 (2011),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/regpol/circular-a-4_r
egulatory-impact-analysis-a-primer.pdf [https://perma.cc/YGZ4-JG3K]. See also 67
Fed. Reg. at 8459 ("Where appropriate, data should have full, accurate, and
transparent documentation, and error sources affecting data quality should be
identified and disclosed to users.").





n256  Conn. Light & Power Co. v. Nuclear Reg. Comm'n, 673 F.2d 525, 530 (D.C.
Cir. 1982); see also Chamber of Commerce v. SEC, 443 F.3d 890, 899 (D.C. Cir.
2006) (stating agencies must reveal "technical studies and data" to public);
Solite Corp. v. EPA, 952 F.2d 473, 484 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (same); Portland Cement
Ass'n v. Ruckelshaus, 486 F.2d 375, 393 (D.C. Cir. 1973) (stating rulemaking
process cannot function with inadequate data).





n257  67 Fed. Reg. at 8456.





n258  See 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(4) (2012).





n259  See id. § 552(b)(7).





n260  See, e.g., Average Fuel Economy Standards Passenger Cars and Light Trucks
Model Year 2011, 74 Fed. Reg. 14,196, 14,219 (Mar. 30, 2009) ("NHTSA cannot make
public the entire contents of the product plans. The submitted product plans
contain confidential business information, which the agency is prohibited by
federal law from disclosing.").





n261  For a general discussion of the kinds of data that typically fall under
FOIA's exemptions, especially the exemption for trade secrets and commercial
information, see Critical Mass Energy Project v. Nuclear Regulatory Comm'n, 975
F.2d 871, 872-74 (D.C. Cir. 1992).





n262  5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7)(E) (2012).





n263  Even though embedded machine learning is not initially compiled for a law
enforcement purpose, these algorithms could be exempted due to the reasonable
expectation that enforcement will ultimately ensue from collection of that
information. See Gen. Elec. Co. v. EPA, 18 F. Supp. 2d 138, 144 (D. Mass. 1998).





n264  See 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(4) (2012).





n265  See BERK, supra note 33, at 193-203.





n266  Ctr. for Auto Safety v. Nat'l Highway Traffic Safety Admin., 244 F.3d 144,
150-51 (D.C. Cir. 2001) (quoting Pub. Citizen Health Research Grp. v. FDA, 704
F.2d 1280, 1288 (D.C. Cir. 1983)); see also Appleton v. FDA, 451 F. Supp. 2d
129, 142-44 (D.D.C. 2006).





n267  There may be instances where this developmental information must be
disclosed. See, e.g., Am. Radio Relay League, Inc. v. FCC, 524 F.3d 227, 237
(D.C. Cir. 2008) (holding that redacted studies on which the FCC relied must be
disclosed because "there is no APA precedent allowing an agency to cherry-pick a
study on which it has chosen to rely in part"). If, on the other hand,
supplementary information from which conclusions are not drawn merely
"clarif[ies], expand[s], or amend[s] other data that has been offered for
comment," then such information may be withheld. Chamber of Commerce v. SEC, 443
F.3d 890, 900, 903 (D.C. Cir. 2006). Thus, whether previous algorithm runs would
legally need to be disclosed will depend on their role in a particular
proceeding.





n268  See Presidential Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and
Agencies Concerning the Freedom of Information Act, 74 Fed. Reg. 4683, 4683
(Jan. 26, 2009).





n269  See BERK, supra note 33, at 236-49.





n270  See Cutler et al., supra note 211, and accompanying text.





n271  See MAYER-SCH[#xD6]NBERGER & CUKIER, supra note 8, at 65 ("In our daily
lives, we think so often in causal terms that we may believe causality can
easily be shown. The truth is much less comfortable.").





n272  NLRB v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 421 U.S. 132, 138 (1975).





n273  NLRB v. Robbins Tire & Rubber Co., 437 U.S. 214, 242 (1978).





n274  As discussed infra Section I.C, these algorithms may be embedded or tied
together in overarching computer programs that translate predictions into
administrative actions. Forthcoming research suggests that optimal transparency
and accountability may also require that agencies publish cryptographic
commitments of these programs to demonstrate the regularity of their decision
making. See Kroll et al., supra note 1, at 18-21.





n275  In other words, we suggest that the administrative use of machine learning
will be unexceptional from a legal perspective; it will not necessitate any
"systemic change to laws or legal institutions in order to preserve or rebalance
established values." Calo, supra note 120, at 553. Interestingly, Calo describes
how robotics may possess a moderate level of exceptionalism in other legal
domains, such as criminal and tort law. Id. at 552-55.





n276  See, e.g., Timothy Aeppel, What Clever Robots Mean for Jobs, WALL ST. J.
(Feb. 24, 2015, 10:30 PM),
http://www.wsj.com/articles/what-clever-robots-mean-for-jobs-1424835002
[https://perma.cc/E8JJ-VB6Y]; Claire Cain Miller, Can an Algorithm Hire Better
Than a Human?, N.Y. TIMES (June 25, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/26/upshot/can-an-algorithm-hire-better-than-a-hum
an.html [https://perma.cc/N6QZ-AD55]; Zeynep Tufekci, The Machines Are Coming,
N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 18, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/19/opinion/sunday/the-machines-are-coming.html
[https://perma.cc/7WY5-ENV6].





n277  See, e.g., Peter Holley, Apple Co-Founder on Artificial Intelligence: 'The
Future Is Scary and Very Bad for People,' WASH. POST (Mar. 24, 2015),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2015/03/24/apple-co-founder-o
n-artificial-intelligence-the-future-is-scary-and-very-bad-for-people
[https://perma.cc/8ATY-TZK3].





n278  See MAYER-SCH[#xD6]NBERGER & CUKIER, supra note 8, at 158-62; see also
Barocas & Selbst, supra note 179, at 673; Crawford & Schultz, supra note 119, at
103-05; Andrew Guthrie Ferguson, Big Data and Predictive Reasonable Suspicion,
163 U. PA. L. REV. 327, 329-30 (2015); Ferguson, supra note 16 (manuscript at
3).





n279  Robert H. Latiff & Patrick J. McCloskey, With Drone Warfare, America
Approaches the Robo-Rubicon, WALL ST. J. (Mar. 14, 2013, 7:37 PM),
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887324128504578346333246145590
[https://perma.cc/MV88-F9BQ].





n280  See Cary Coglianese & Gary E. Marchant, Shifting Sands: The Limits of
Science in Setting Risk Standards, 152 U. PA. L. REV. 1255, 1257-58 (2004).





n281  See supra Section I.B.





n282  Sometimes the use of benefit-cost analysis by administrative agencies has
been resisted out of concern that it will substitute mechanistically for human
judgment. See, e.g., Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions,
107 YALE L.J. 1981, 2070 (1998) (arguing that numbers "[a]t worst" can "derail
thoughtful discussion by offering the illusion of objective accuracy"). But even
economists recognize that benefit-cost analysis can never fully determine a
policy decision. See, e.g., Kenneth J. Arrow et al., Is There a Role for
Benefit-Cost Analysis in Environmental, Health, and Safety Regulation?, 272 SCI.
221, 221 (1996) (acknowledging that "benefit-cost analysis has a potentially
important role to play in helping inform regulatory decision-making, although it
should not be the sole basis for such decision-making"); John J. Donohue III,
Why We Should Discount the Views of Those Who Discount Discounting, 108 YALE
L.J. 1901, 1910 (1999) (noting that no one should "be a slave to such an
analysis").





n283  Nor will the use of machine learning always be easy. Although we have
discussed how the need for specified objective functions will be more likely to
produce legislation that assuages legal concerns over nondelegation, and how the
same need for goal precision can mitigate concerns based on antidiscrimination
and transparency principles, it may often be more difficult in practice for
decision makers to agree on how to specify the objectives of administrative
algorithms. As Justice Cuéllar has noted, these difficulties may arise
frequently "because agreement at a high level of generality rarely translates
into consensus on how to implement policies through administrative agencies."
Cuéllar, supra note 25, at 16.





n284  See supra note 140 and accompanying text.





n285  In calling for increased artificial intelligence expertise in government,
a recent report from Stanford notes that "insufficiently trained officials may
simply take the word of industry technologists and green light a sensitive
application [of artificial intelligence] that has not been adequately vetted."
PETER STONE ET AL., ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE IN 2030, at 43 (2016),
https://ai100.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ai_100_report_0901fnlb.pdf
[https://perma.cc/9HPP-72XZ].





n286  See supra Section II.B.





n287  See supra Section II.C.





n288  See e.g., Barocas & Selbst, supra note 179; Pauline T. Kim, Data-Driven
Discrimination at Work, 58 WM. & MARY L. REV. (forthcoming 2017); Angwin et al.,
supra note 232; Kate Crawford, Opinion, Artificial Intelligence's White Guy
Problem, N.Y. TIMES (June 25, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/opinion/sunday/artificial-intelligences-white-
guy-problem.html [https://perma.cc/RCH6-MUKF]; Noyes, supra note 180; Schrage,
supra note 180.





n289  See generally Niraj Chokshi, How #BlackLivesMatter Came to Define a
Movement, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 22, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/23/us/how-blacklivesmatter-came-to-define-amoveme
nt.html [https://perma.cc/34W8-GNRK] (chronicling the development of the Black
Lives Matter movement in response to police violence).





n290  See supra note 229 and accompanying text.





n291  See supra Section II.D.





n292  See supra Section II.D. Note that OMB guidelines have stated that
technical methodology subjected to peer review can be presumed to be
sufficiently objective. See Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality,
Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal
Agencies, 67 Fed. Reg. 8,452 (Feb. 22, 2002).





n293  See supra note 172.





n294  The difficulties of programming morality into artificially intelligent
systems has been discussed previously, such as in the context of the choice of
autonomous cars about which humans to harm when faced with scenarios inevitably
resulting in some human casualties. See, e.g., John Markoff, Should Your
Driverless Car Hit a Pedestrian to Save Your Life?, N.Y. TIMES (June 23, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/24/technology/should-your-driverless-car-hit-a-pe
destrian-to-save-your-life.html [https://perma.cc/PL2N-R7GR].





n295  Governmental use of machine learning could create a "Tesla effect," of
sorts. The Tesla effect refers to the principle that, even though driverless
cars may be statistically far safer than manned ones, widespread alarm results
when even a few individuals become victims of accidents involving a Tesla
operating autonomously. Cf. Larry Greenemeier, Deadly Tesla Crash Exposes
Confusion over Automated Driving, SCI. AM. (July 8, 2016),
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/deadly-tesla-crash-exposes-confusion-o
ver-automated-driving [https://perma.cc/72C4-T33P] (discussing both
self-driving's safety features and the collective apprehension after a fatal
accident involving a self-driving car).





n296  See, e.g., Tom R. Tyler, Procedural Justice, Legitimacy, and the Effective
Rule of Law, 30 CRIME & JUSTICE 283 (2003).





n297  See CARY COGLIANESE, LISTENING, LEARNING, LEADING: A FRAMEWORK FOR
REGULATORY EXCELLENCE 9 (2015),
https://www.law.upenn.edu/live/files/4946-pprfinalconvenersreport.pdf
[https://perma.cc/F89X-SGHB] (describing "empathic engagement" as a core
attribute of regulatory excellence); Cary Coglianese, Regulatory Excellence as
"People Excellence," REGBLOG (Oct. 23, 2015),
http://www.regblog.org/2015/10/23/coglianese-people-excellence/
[https://perma.cc/7AND-FB8K] ("[R]egulatory excellence demands the consistent
achievement of three fundamental attributes: utmost integrity, empathic
engagement, and stellar competence." (emphasis in original)). It may even be
worthwhile for agencies to consider ways of developing online, anthropomorphic
representations as part of a human-computer interface to encourage more empathic
and emotionally positive interactions between citizens and their increasingly
robotic regulators. Cf. Kate Darling, "Who's Johnny?": Anthropomorphic Framing
in Human-Robot Interaction, Integration, and Policy, in ROBOT ETHICS 2.0
(forthcoming 2017), http://ssrn.com/abstract_2588669
[https://perma.cc/66PQ-6U85] (recognizing concerns around framing robotic
technology in human terms but noting the benefits of anthropomorphizing robots);
Will Davies, Robot Amelia--A Glimpse of the Future for Local Government,
GUARDIAN (July 4, 2016, 2:10 AM),
https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jul/04/robot-amelia-futu
re-local-government-enfieldcouncil [https://perma.cc/EZG3-GXCF] (describing how
a London borough has begun responding to citizen requests, such as for permits,
using a voice response system that employs natural language processing to
interpret emotions in citizens' voices and respond appropriately and
empathetically); Adriana Hamacher et al., Believing in BERT: Using Expressive
Communication to Enhance Trust and Counteract Operational Error in Physical
Human-Robot Interaction, Presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Robot
and Human Interactive Communication (2016), http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.08817
[https://perma.cc/PV72-UZFM] (describing how robots with affective interaction
styles recover more of humans' trust after they make errors than robots that are
more efficient yet impersonal).





n298  See supra note 9 and accompanying text.





n299  See supra Section I.C.





n300  U.S. Office of Pers. Mgmt., SIZING UP THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH: FISCAL YEAR
2015, at 5 (2016),
https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/data-analysis-documentation/federal-em
ployment-reports/reports-publications/sizing-up-the-executive-branch-2015.pdf
[https://perma.cc/4FGX-2B4H].





n301  See supra note 119 and accompanying text.





n302  Cf. Paul M. Schwartz, Information Privacy in the Cloud, 161 U. PA. L. REV.
1623, 1661-62 (2013) (considering United States and European Union definitions
of "personal information" and suggesting regulatory reforms for cloud storage to
ensure "strong and effective protections for information privacy").





n303  Cf. Andrew Keane Woods, Against Data Exceptionalism, 68 STAN. L. REV. 729,
731 (2016) (discussing competing conceptions of the territoriality of personal
data).





n304  This kind of ethical oversight has also been called for in recent
considerations of a future medical profession driven substantially by machine
learning. See Alison M. Darcy et al., Opinion, Machine Learning and the
Profession of Medicine, 315 J. AM. MED. ASS'N. 551, 551 (2016) ("The profession
of medicine has a tremendous opportunity and an obligation to oversee the
application of this [machine-learning] technology to patient care.").





n305  There may also be instances in which pursuing machine learning is
advantageous and worthwhile only when human intuition can be incorporated into
algorithms. Cf. Jens Jakob W. H. S[#xF8]rensen et al., Exploring the Quantum
Speed Limit with Computer Games, 532 NATURE 210, 213 (2016) (describing how
addressing key technical issues facing quantum computing may be facilitated by
incorporating the results of human intuition, gleaned from computer games
simulating atomic movement, into machine-learning algorithms).





n306  Coglianese, supra note 22.





n307  See Michael Luca, Jon Kleinberg & Sendhil Mullainathan, Algorithms Need
Managers, Too, 94 HARV. BUS. REV. 96 (Jan.-Feb. 2016),
https://hbr.org/2016/01/algorithms-need-managers-too
[https://perma.cc/7YAB-MK4S].





n308  Cf. G[#xF6]kçe Sargut & Rita McGrath, Learning to Live with Complexity,
HARV. BUS. REV. (Sept. 2011),
https://hbr.org/2011/09/learning-to-live-with-complexity
[https://perma.cc/94HV-65PW] (describing the management techniques required to
oversee complex, data-driven systems); Latanya Sweeney, Discrimination in Online
Ad Delivery, 56 COMMC'NS ACM 44, 53 (2013) (describing Google's need to contend
with differential delivery of advertisements for arrest records when individuals
search for names typically associated with different races). Algorithms applied
in administrative contexts will face the same possible risks of bounded
cognition that can accompany well-accepted, performance-based regulatory
standards because objective functions will be defined in terms of desired
outcomes. See Cary Coglianese, Performance-Based Regulation: Concepts and
Challenges, in COMPARATIVE LAW AND REGULATION: UNDERSTANDING THE GLOBAL
REGULATORY PROCESS 403 (Francesca Bignami & David Zaring eds., 2016).





n309  Cf. Charles E. Lindblom, The Science of "Muddling Through," 19 PUB. ADMIN.
REV. 79 (1959) (discussing the complexity of the mosaic nature of traditional
administrative decision making).





n310  The Internet, for example, has vastly expanded the ways in which
administrative agencies can communicate with the public in rulemaking, but
taking advantage of these opportunities still requires careful consideration of
factors such as how to make information equally accessible to all members of the
public. See Cary Coglianese, Enhancing Public Access to Online Rulemaking
Information, 2 MICH. J. ENVTL. &ADMIN. L. 1, 39-40 (2012).





n311  Cf. Gibbs, supra note 11.





n312  Coglianese, supra note 22.





n313  See Brenden M. Lake et al., Human-Level Concept Learning Through
Probabilistic Program Induction, 350 SCIENCE 1332 (2015) (suggesting that the
brain-computer analogy could profitably guide research); Gary Marcus, Face It,
Your Brain Is a Computer, N.Y. TIMES (June 27, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/28/opinion/sunday/face-it-your-brain-is-a-compute
r.html [https://perma.cc/6S4BPENT].





n314  Governmental decision-making processes have grown neither more
straightforward nor less opaque since Bismarck's famous quip about the
similarities between lawmaking and sausage making.


                               3 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                         The Straits Times (Singapore)

                             July 6, 2017 Thursday

Predictive policing tool helps LA cops curb crime;
PredPol software uses historical data to pinpoint crime hot spots in the city

BYLINE: Zaihan Mohamed Yusof

SECTION: HOME

LENGTH: 520 words


It is not exactly like the 2002 futuristic science-fiction film Minority Report,
in which police officers arrest potential criminals before they commit crimes.

Yet, some crime-fighting innovations like PredPol appear to give police the
upper hand in deterring crime, said Commander Jorge R. Rodriguez from the Los
Angeles Police Department (LAPD).

Comdr Rodriguez was a guest speaker yesterday at the Interpol World 2017
Congress.

He shared the LAPD's experience by presenting a case study highlighting the use
of PredPol, a predictive policing software that pinpoints crime hot spots based
on historical data like crime type, location and date.

Comdr Rodriguez, who heads eight police stations in Los Angeles, California, had
told The Straits Times a day earlier that predictive policing helps narrow the
likelihood of a crime occurring in areas depicted by a 500 feet by 500 feet box,
which works out to 2.3ha.

He said: "So, what we tell our officers as they're driving from Point A to Point
B through the city is know where these boxes are, and drive through them, so you
can provide a police presence."

First introduced to the LAPD in 2012, PredPol was used to track property crimes
like burglaries, theft from vehicles and motor vehicle thefts.

During his time as captain at three Los Angeles police divisions, property
crimes decreased, he said.

But he emphasised that PredPol should be used only to augment police operations.

Comdr Rodriguez, who became a police officer in 1987, said: "No matter what
technology you have or how advanced you get, you'll still need the human element
and cooperation from the community. Human intel cannot be replaced by anything
else."

While there are fears that predictive policing might infringe on civil
liberties, the greater concern now facing the LAPD is perhaps the increase in
violent crimes.

A Los Angeles Times report last December stated that violent- crime figures had
risen for a third straight year in the wake of homicides and gang-related
shootings which resulted in 290 people being killed in the city, though the
number is lower when compared with the 480 killed a decade ago.

Unfortunately, property-crime figures have gone up too.

Comdr Rodriguez attributed the rise to the decriminalisation of some offences.

He added: "A lot of crime (penalties) have been lowered from felonies to
misdemeanours. For property crimes, these individuals know the time they're
going to get is minimal when it comes to sentencing.

"Right now, the biggest problem we have is the drug problem."

With the legalisation of marijuana in states like Colorado, Oregon and
California, crime figures are expected to rise more, he said.

"You've got to support your (drug) habit (by committing crime)," said Comdr
Rodriguez, who thinks that marijuana is a gateway drug.

Over the years, he has met doctors, professional basketball players and
well-to-do individuals who had all started their drug abuse with marijuana.

He said: "Next thing you know, they're chasing a high and looking for a bigger
euphoric feeling."

They then progress to harder drugs like cocaine and methamphetamines, he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Commander Jorge R. Rodriguez was a speaker at the Interpol World 2017
Congress.

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                Copyright 2017 Singapore Press Holdings Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               4 of 27 DOCUMENTS

                Copyright (c) 2017 Texas Law Review Association
                                Texas Law Review

                                  April, 2017

                                Texas Law Review

                              95 Tex. L. Rev. 1077

LENGTH: 12561 words

BOOK REVIEW: Is Mass Incarceration History?From the War on Poverty to the War on
Crime: The Making of Mass Incarceration in America. By Elizabeth Hinton.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2016. 464 pages. $ 29.95.

NAME: Jonathan Simon*

BIO: * Adrian A. Kragen Professor of Law and Faculty Director, Center for the
Study of Law & Society, U.C. Berkeley.

TEXT:
 [*1077]

   Introduction: The End of Mass Incarceration

 "The Owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the falling of the dusk." n1

   Despite Hegel's ultimately reassuring premise, it never seemed inevitable
that the emergence of mass incarceration as a proper historical subject would
occur simultaneously with its institutional and political demise. History, as a
scientific and humanistic tradition with its own methodologies, sources, and
conventions, inevitably keeps some distance on the present. Typically, a
generation or two has passed before a truly significant political development,
like the New Deal or the Cold War, escapes the pull of presentist hagiography
(or demonology) and comes under the full possession of professional historical
gaze, after journalism and political science have had their varying efforts at
neutralizing the present. In contrast, the point at which a significant
political phenomenon has lost its dominance over the present is a much less
regular or inevitable pattern. n2 And yet, the  [*1078]  recent wave of
historical analysis of mass incarceration, a development that began in the
1970s, happens to be emerging at a moment of political questioning more profound
than at any time since the late 1960s and early 1970s. From the Supreme Court's
powerful condemnation of California's overcrowding n3 to the Black Lives Matter
movement's growing presence in the streets and voting booths of major cities,
the contemporary carceral state is under attack.

   While there is no guarantee that we will in fact see substantial
institutional change in the size and nature of the carceral state, the emerging
historiography of mass incarceration has been shaped by the very possibility of
that change and has lessons that could be crucial in strengthening the growing
movement for reform. Elizabeth Hinton's impeccably researched study of federal
crime policy from the Kennedy through Reagan Administrations is the most telling
account yet of this new history of the American carceral state. n4 This has been
a topic of considerable interest to political scientists and criminologists
since the 1990s, n5 but Hinton is able to  [*1079]  draw on confidential memos
and other materials from the National Archives and presidential libraries to
draw a far more precise picture than ever before of what national leaders
believed they knew about crime and how they intended to act on the problem. Her
account, likely to be the most definitive one for years to come, confirms the
centrality of political considerations to the shaping of mass incarceration as
urged by earlier studies, while giving us a much more detailed and pointed
analysis of what those political considerations were.

   In particular, Hinton's analysis places concern over the political and social
threat of collective violence by black youth growing up in segregated
neighborhoods of concentrated poverty at the very heart of crime as a national
problem n6 and as the focal point of increasingly punitive "solutions" from
Kennedy to Bush I (and if her history continued through both Bushes). n7 Trying
to prevent black youth from turning to crime and contain those involved with
crime with aggressive policing and excessive incarceration became in many
respects America's chief domestic objective from the Vietnam War to the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan. n8 This obsessive fear of black youth and totalizing
national commitment to their surveillance and control makes all of the
contemporary talk from national leaders about trying to rebuild trust between
police and young people of color ludicrous so long as the war on crime
continues.

   Hinton's study comes at a time when most of the action from scholars in
trying to explain mass incarceration has moved to state and even local levels.
n9 While the carceral state in our federalist system is primarily one of state
and local governments, Hinton's account begins during a period when the federal
government, particularly its Executive Branch, made a concerted effort to alter
the size and character of local criminal justice agencies, including police
departments, courts, and correctional systems throughout the United States. n10
Premised on what was depicted as a serious and growing  [*1080]  threat of
violent crime localized in large cities throughout the nation, the war on crime
involved the dispersal of billions of dollars (nearly two billion per year in
contemporary dollars, three-quarters of which went into policing between 1965
and 1981) n11 as well as the creation of model laws and policies that the money
helped to promote - policies that had previously been considered unwise or
unconstitutional (including preventive pretrial detention and mandatory minimum
sentences). n12 Political scientists studying the war on crime in its early
stages already concluded it had largely failed in its goals of improving the
effectiveness of law enforcement or reducing crime (something Hinton's research
reaffirms), n13 but as Hinton documents, it was an enormously successful
exercise in state building. n14 Creating fear as a byproduct of its success at
putting crime at the very center of American life, the war on crime became
self-perpetuating and continued during the first two decades of this century
even as crime indexes dropped to historic lows n15 and fear of crime largely
diminished as a national political issue. Only today, a half-century after the
key events and decisions that produced the war on crime, and in the face of
repeated scandals of racism, inhumanity, and failure by the carceral state, have
we seen growing social-movement resistance to end that war. n16

   Although historiographical-research time frames (based in large part on
archival access policies) determine that her narrative ends some twenty-five
years prior to the present moment, n17 Hinton's themes connect directly to the
growing discontent with the systems of punitive policing and mass incarceration,
and carry clear implications for those who would seek to reform or radically
change those systems. Chillingly for reformers and radicals alike, almost all of
the ideas being circulated in the name of "reforming" the carceral state today
were already parts of the thinking that shaped the war on crime and are thus
quite unlikely to alter its fundamental character.

    [*1081]  After reviewing Hinton's major findings, this Book Review turns
first to Hinton's historiographical contributions and second to her lessons for
those who would like to make history by ending mass incarceration.

   I. From War on Poverty to War on Crime

 In Hinton's convincing account, the road from a federal campaign to eliminate
entrenched poverty in the United States to a much larger one aimed at fighting
crime by policing and punishing people in poverty was a remarkably short one,
and the long war on crime and drugs pursued since then has been a boringly
repetitive one. n18 From its beginnings in the Kennedy Administration, the "war
on poverty" was braided closely with questions of crime, and particularly,
delinquency. n19 The latter was taken to be a product of lacking opportunities
for integration into the mainstream of social and economic life in combination
with the reinforcing stigma of criminalization and punishment. n20 The attempted
solutions were efforts to accelerate the exposure of these same youths to
mainstreaming opportunities. The upbeat name for this concept was "Mobilization
for Youth" - a program aimed at young people generally in poor neighborhoods.
n21 At its most ambitious level, and never in more than a small portion of the
nation's needy areas, this effort placed federal grants into the hands of
frontline antipoverty organizations and community organizers ("community action
workers" in the terminology of the moment) to socially organize and politically
empower poor families and communities. n22 Five years later in the Johnson
Administration, and despite that President having made an even louder commitment
to waging war on poverty than his predecessor, efforts to mobilize youth in
poverty had been substantially superseded and assimilated into a far larger
effort to maintain surveillance and control over black youth living in
neighborhoods of concentrated poverty. n23

   This newly dubbed "war on crime" was to be run through the law
enforcement-oriented Department of Justice, and its foot soldiers, rather than
[*1082]  "community action workers," were big city police forces, n24 perhaps
the most antiblack organized force in America in those years of still-expanding
civil rights. Its goals remained mixed at first, to mainstream youth perceived
as at risk of becoming involved in crime but also to confront, arrest, and
punish those black youths whose potentiality for crime crossed over into
criminal behavior. n25 Even before the feverish year of 1968 and Nixon's dog
whistling "law and order" campaign, n26 the die was largely cast. Poverty
elimination would have to wait for a successful effort to reestablish urban
social control over segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty. The Nixon
Administration would accelerate this already rapid shift by introducing model
laws for the District of Columbia aimed at increasing police power and the
punitive potential of criminal convictions, and pivoting from Johnson's
overwhelming investment in policing toward a more balanced portfolio of police,
courts, and corrections departments. n27 Ford and Carter would bring important
innovations toward ever-lengthening prison sentences and an increasingly
fortified urban-suburban landscape. n28 Yet all of this remains largely in the
tight operating principles of the war-on-crime logic that Hinton sees in place
of the very appointment of the Johnson Administration's much vaunted National
Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice. n29 What
happened?

   Hinton places even more emphasis than previous accounts have on the political
significance of the pattern of urban riots or uprisings that, beginning with the
Watts Riots in Los Angeles in 1965, shook America's large-and medium-sized
cities and the political landscape through most of the summers into the early
1970s. n30 Unlike the more generalized idea of "crime in the streets" into which
they obviously played, urban riots galvanized very specific concerns of
collective violence directed against white society and its governmental forces
(particularly the police). In fact, to the extent that these events had a
political logic, it was one very much aimed against big-city police whose forms
of order maintenance had always involved routine racial  [*1083]  harassment
and, in the increasingly turbulent 1960s, were becoming more violent and
confrontational. n31 Ironically, the major solution the Johnson Administration
promoted, notwithstanding much talk of investment and rebuilding, was even
larger, better equipped, and more lethal police forces. n32

   If riots could be seen as protests of the inadequate pace of antipoverty
policy and the unmediated tyranny of virtually all-white urban police forces
(and the often white supremacist political machines to which they were
attached), they were an even more potent weapon in the hands of those who argued
that criminality arising from the "tangle of pathologies" associated with
segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty was a threat to national
security. n33 Even the sympathetic liberals of the Johnson Administration saw
the riots as signs that antipoverty programs, at least at the individualized
behavioral level to which post-New Deal liberal politics consigns them, might
not stem the tide of black violence in time to prevent, if not a revolution, at
least a fatal rupture of support for the Johnson agenda nationally. n34 Much
like the increasingly grim conflict in Vietnam to which a wide variety of
observers drew parallels, n35 the war on crime would have to reestablish a
coercive balance of control before more hopeful efforts to win the hearts and
minds of young residents of segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty
could be attempted. The strategy would prove futile in both domestic and foreign
policy, but it would take far longer to declare the war on crime a failure.

   The riots were important also because they reinforced the racialized
criminology that formed the core intellectual framework for the war on crime. In
this analysis, drawn from the midcentury and at least initially from liberal
social scientists like Daniel P. Moynihan, James Q. Wilson, and Edward Banfield,
crime as a problem stemmed from the transformations of the modern city and the
rise of what a later generation would call the  [*1084]  "underclass." n36
Captured perhaps most enduringly by Moynihan's imagistic concept of the tangle
of urban pathologies (read urban as black), this theory saw the deformed black
family produced by the aftermath of slavery and, more recently, the Great
Migration (single parent, female headed) as the key source of a demographic and
cultural tide of nonconformity and violence that threatened American society and
certainly the claims of liberalism to govern it. n37 The riots proved that this
tide was already present and capable of overwhelming the local police forces
(many if not most of the riots involved national guards force being mobilized by
the Governor and in some cases federal troops ordered by the President). n38 To
avoid a military commitment perhaps many times the scale of Vietnam, it would be
necessary to permanently bolster the scale and military capacity of local
police, while counterbalancing the dangerous population through aggressive use
of arrest and imprisonment. n39

   As much as this is a book about mass incarceration, it is also a book about
policing and particularly the way that expanding policing in the 1960s and 1970s
paved the road to a larger prison population in the 1980s and 1990s. It is
essential that we link mass incarceration to the kind of aggressive preemptive
policing that has been a major product of the war on crime and that forms the
core of what today is becoming intolerable to many Americans about our carceral
state. Johnson and Nixon shared an obsession with growing and transforming
American police forces, which both presidents saw as the frontline troops who
could contain the crime threat of alienated black youth. n40 In addition to
expanding the size of police forces and giving them the kind of military
equipment necessary for fighting Vietnam-like counterinsurgency wars, n41 the
war on crime, early on, embraced a transformation of policing toward preemptive
confrontation with the "enemy," an enemy increasingly defined as all black young
men in segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty. The enormous influence
of George Kelling and James Q. Wilson's 1982 "Broken Windows" article  [*1085]
has led to the association of this kind of policing with that decade and since,
n42 but Hinton draws direct lines from the Johnson-Nixon war-on-crime centers in
the Justice Department to this new model. n43 It is from these origins in the
intersection between the war on poverty and the war on crime that the new
policing received its indelible ambiguity as to whether it is about policing
that is responsive to minority communities ("community policing," "problem
centered policing"), n44 or whether it is about policing that is responsive to
technocratically set management objectives (CompStat, predictive policing,
hotspots policing). n45 It has always been both but with the heaviest commitment
to the latter.

   This new policing model largely superseded a model that had just recently
been invented under the modernizing influence of two influential chiefs that
typified midcentury commitments to professionalization of policing, William
Parker of Los Angeles and O.W. Wilson of Chicago, and based on more efficient
and rational management of car-based patrols. n46 This approach was intended to
increase response time and recapture discretionary hours left to police conduct
in area-based patrols. Even if it did not do much to reduce crime by increasing
arrests, motorized patrol in time might have had a good influence on police
racism and violence against people of color since it subjected police to the
centralized controls of dispatchers. n47 Instead, the new imperatives of the war
on crime made what had seemed modern outmoded and allowed a radically
transformed version of the "old time" foot-patrol model to return in the form of
a deeply hostile sort of counterinsurgency policing. n48

    [*1086]  Some of Hinton's best work is tracing ideals forged in Washington
to their implementation in places like Detroit, Los Angeles, and other large
cities experiencing the dislocations of deindustrialization and middle-class
suburbanization even as the Great Migration continued to bring blacks from the
South to cities in the Midwest and West. n49 Some of these programs, funded by
the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA) and based on this
preemptive model, like Detroit's STRESS program (for Stop the Robberies, Enjoy
Safe Streets), and Los Angeles CRASH (for Community Resources Against Street
Hoodlums), and the federal government's Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement
(ODALE), have been discussed by previous studies of the crime war, n50 but never
with as much detail and connection between model and outcome. In retrospect the
contradictions of these programs were hiding in the plain sight of their
acronyms. Who was supposed to enjoy the "safe streets" produced by STRESS?
Certainly not the young men of color who were confronted, humiliated, and
sometimes killed outright. The community whose resources would be used to attack
"street hoodlums" obviously did not include young black men living in segregated
neighborhoods of concentrated poverty.

   If police were the foot soldiers of America's parallel Vietnam, then young
black men living in segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty were the
Viet Cong - the enemy. The question of how many of them were hardcore combatants
whose security could only be achieved through death or incapacitation and how
many of them were alienated youths who could be nudged back into channels of
social integration created a space for some contestation within the overall
war-on-crime paradigm, but the consensus was clear on the question of
dangerousness of this population and agreed that this danger lay in the traits
low-income urban youth had as a population and not in their individual
characteristics. n51 In the Johnson Administration, Youth Service Bureaus were
imagined to be "institutional substitutes for parents" where police officers
could help replace the lost, normative force of proper two-parent households.
n52 By the Ford Administration, the focus would be more on targeting "hard-core"
youth offenders for permanent  [*1087]  incapacitation through federal
prosecution and long-term imprisonment. n53 Yet throughout, liberals and
conservatives agreed that this population (and public safety) would be best
served through exposure to ever greater "treatments" of aggressive policing. n54

   The chapters on the Ford and Carter Administrations were some of the most
rewarding for this author. I had naively suggested in my own study of the war on
crime that these post-Watergate years saw some relaxation on the grip of
battling crime by the American Presidency and its Pentagon-like Department of
Justice. n55 In fact, both accelerated the war on crime even while seeking to
bring a more technocratic and less ideological tone to it. Consistent with both
trends, the Ford Administration sought to increase the focus on particularly
dangerous persons, supposed "career criminals" (or at least those with a long
record of being arrested for crimes) or gang members, that offered the prospect
of a more efficient war on crime (although this focus was mostly added on to
existing criminalization), marking perhaps the beginning of the "new penology"
as Feeley and I described the trend toward risk rationalization inside the
carceral state. n56

   Hinton's story of the path toward mass incarceration is so bleak and so
determined that it is difficult to notice that she also points frequently to the
paths not taken and now long covered by the "success" of mass incarceration as a
project. n57 The Kerner Commission, appointed by President Johnson after the
Detroit and Newark riots in 1967, described the emerging war on crime as heading
toward a ""spiral' of segregation, violence, and police force" suggesting that
only a substantial effort to break the back of urban segregation could escape
that cycle. n58 Inside the segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty,
activists like the Black Panthers proposed their own versions of antipoverty and
crime programs. n59 Either of these projects might have had just as much success
against crime and collective violence as the war on crime (which had very
little), while having the great benefit of not  [*1088]  leading us inexorably
toward mass incarceration. In retrospect, it seems difficult to believe that any
of these projects could have moved fast enough to head off the urban riots of
the late 1960s which were anchored in the increasingly violent attacks of racist
big-city police forces against black communities (a violence anchored, in turn,
in police resistance to changing social norms brought on by the rise of the
Civil Rights Movement). This is especially true when you consider how much
federal policy outside the crime arena was altering the fate of the great
cities. These policies, including promoting the movement of the middle class to
segregated all-white suburbs, carving freeways through dense urban corridors to
facilitate suburbanization and interstate markets, the deindustrialization of
the major Northern cities facilitated by that subsidized transportation network,
and the antiunion tilt of federal labor law after the 1940s, left central cities
in a precarious state on the eve of the 1960s. n60 The emerging, post-modern
city was an awkward balance between fortified central business districts,
dependent on freeways and suburban shoppers, and segregated neighborhoods of
concentrated poverty, places inherently susceptible to crime and difficult to
police based on traditional (foot patrol) or modern (car patrol linked to
dispatch) methods. n61

   Hinton adopts a thoroughly and justifiably skeptical view of crime statistics
in this period. Convinced crime was rising rapidly, especially in the large
cities, national leaders made improving the collection of crime reports a major
priority for improving the police. Of course this led to rises, sometimes
substantial rises, in reported crime rates, precisely the outcome that was
driving fear of crime. n62 The war on crime contributed to crime in even more
insidious ways, such as effect that aggressive decoy operations made on the
homicide rate in cities like Detroit. n63 Yet what we know today about the
environmental and situational roots of crime suggests serious crime probably did
go up significantly in segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty during
the 1960s and 1970s as criminogenic conditions met a policing strategy that was
uncertain and shifting (and implemented by a  [*1089]  policing work force that
at that time in history was undeniably dominated by straight-up racists). n64

   While Hinton's approach is the right one for a history of state power, we
still lack a proper history of the war on crime from the popular perspective.
The wave of urban histories of the post-war period has given us a clear view of
the disarray created even before reported crime rates began to go up. n65 Hinton
has given us a newly precise picture of how Washington-based planners saw their
objectives and obstacles from the Pentagon of the war on crime. We next need new
histories of urban popular forces and their experience of criminalization
itself; naturally these archives never open (or close).

   II. Historiography of Mass Incarceration

 We are in the midst of a wave of mass incarceration history. Hinton's study of
the war on crime comes several years after a widely discussed special issue of
the Journal of American History devoted to the history of mass incarceration.
n66 Heather Thompson's history of the Attica Prison uprising and its influence
on the shape of the American carceral state was published in August of 2016. n67
All of these differ from earlier histories of particular prisons or even state
prison systems because they make mass incarceration as such the subject and
attempt to increase our understanding of both the causal mechanisms that
triggered and sustained it, and the lost possibilities for a different present
covered over by the success of mass incarceration. Hinton's study exemplifies
many features that are crucial to doing the history of broad governmental
programs like the war on crime that can get lost between the appeals of social
history on the one hand and more traditional history of legislation on the
other.

   A. The Importance of Ideas and Specific Intellectuals

 Ideas and the academic entrepreneurs behind them matter greatly in Hinton's
analysis. Looming especially large is the trio of James Q. Wilson, Edward
Banfield, and Daniel Moynihan. The first two were political  [*1090]  scientists
(Banfield was Wilson's doctoral supervisor n68 ), both interested primarily in
race and the governance of the post-war cities, especially in policing. Banfield
is best remembered for his sulfurous but fascinating portrait of the
contradictions underlying urban social policy in the 1960s. n69 Wilson, the
student, would be much more important to the actual policy stream, promoting the
idea that a modest but significant increase in the actual use and length of
imprisonment could substantially reduce then-rising rates of reported crime and
later the idea of "broken windows" policing. n70 Later still, in the 1990s,
Wilson promoted racialized ideas about what had driven the high reported crime
rates of the late 1980s, n71 and in the work of one of his students, John
DiLulio, promoted the most ideological of all the war-on-crime constructions,
the "super-predators" - juveniles who were brought up in the female-headed homes
common in segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty. n72 Moynihan, a
sociologist who would become a central domestic policy advisor to both the
Johnson and Nixon Administrations and eventually a long-serving U.S. Senator
from New York, authored the famous internal memo known as the Moynihan Report,
which blamed high crime levels on long-term damage done to the black family
structure by slavery and its aftermaths. n73 While somewhat different in their
specific projects, Wilson and Moynihan shared a common focus on the black family
and what Moynihan called the "tangle of pathology" that tied blacks living in
segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty to crime. n74 Hinton argues
that the common policy conclusion was an ever-tightening  [*1091]  noose of
policing and prison around the necks of young black males living in these
pathology-tangled neighborhoods. n75

   Hinton's thorough exploration of the intellectual grounds of the war on crime
highlights many other significant social science interventions, not all of them
as intentionally oriented toward enhancing the scale of the carceral state as
the previous three (Wilson, Moynihan, and DiLulio). In the early days of what
became the war on poverty, the work of sociologists Lloyd Ohlin and Richard
Cloward promoted the idea of direct interventions aimed at reversing the social
and economic isolation that channeled youth in segregated neighborhoods of
concentrated poverty toward crime. n76 While not aimed at promoting law
enforcement strategies, the underlying theory that conditions associated with
black, segregated neighborhoods were criminogenic underscored the potential
threat if antipoverty approaches failed. Hinton persuasively suggests that there
was little to prevent this logic from supporting a police-first approach to
controlling poverty-based crime. n77

   One of the most important and under-recognized social scientists that Hinton
covers here was the late Marvin Wolfgang of the University of Pennsylvania,
whose ideas have not been nearly as controversial as Wilson's but pointed toward
the same racial strategy and whose statistical studies of the distribution of
arrests among a cohort of Philadelphia boys born in 1945 (the baby-boomers)
helped to crystalize the threat posed by black youth. n78 Wolfgang's headline
finding that a small percentage of the youth accounted for more than half the
total arrests in the cohort has shaped many dreams since of targeting
imprisonment on a group of career criminals, high-rate offenders, or
super-predators. n79 Wolfgang's research and its reception crystalizes many of
Hinton's themes. His funding was coming from the war on crime, and his
uncritical reliance on police arrests allowed the filter of police selection and
distribution to shape who the dangerous, high-rate persistent youth would be
(black males from segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty). n80

    [*1092]  Hinton highlights some moments when social science offered truth
telling that might have provided reasons to resist the embrace of mass
incarceration. Most notable are two policy experts who combined law and
criminology, an interdisciplinarity rare at that time and now, James Vorenberg
n81 of Harvard Law School and Frank Zimring, n82 then of Chicago and more
recently of U.C. Berkeley; both criticized efforts at prediction and preemption
as misbegotten and likely to reinforce patterns of racial disadvantage. While
both were funded by war-on-crime research funds, their policy warnings were
largely ignored. n83

   Of course the ideas that triumphed turned out to be highly productive
precisely because they promoted forms of governmental action against the crime
threat, as it was coming to be politically defined, without creating the direct
public strategy on the economic and social isolation of these communities that
the Kerner Commission called for in its "enrichment" strategy. n84 Yet, it would
be a mistake to see these intellectual interventions as serving simply an
ideological purpose of providing a patina of social science respectability to a
control agenda forged on other ground and by other strategists (although some
examples like the "super-predator" concept that emerged from Wilson's thought
via DiLulio clearly fit an ideological role). These intellectual interventions
were politically effective because they offered anticrime strategies that
provided real objectives for federal investments to shape local policing and
imprisonment strategies around. In that sense, social scientists in the war on
crime are examples of what Michel Foucault called "specific intellectuals" in
contrast to the "universal intellectual" whose broad ideas reshape fundamental
principles. n85 Specific intellectuals - Robert Oppenheimer was one of
Foucault's memorable examples n86 - use their theoretical knowledge to forge
practical projects  [*1093]  around which governmental capacities can be
concentrated, like the Manhattan Project. n87 While based on a shockingly thin
empirical basis, the winning ideas behind the war on crime created practical
linkages between the crime threat and ways of redeploying and expanding existing
governmental capacities (policing and incarceration). n88 Viewed as a legal
phenomenon - law breaking - war on crime is an impossible metaphor to realize.
Reconstructed as a sociological phenomenon - black youth in segregated
neighborhoods of concentrated poverty - a war on crime was all too practical.

   B. Technologies of Carceral Power

 Another strength of Hinton's historiographical strategy is its description of
the way administrative policies and legal amendments created new and
unprecedented governmental capacities to surveil and incarcerate citizens. Two
of the most important were stop-and-frisk policing and mandatory minimum
sentences. n89 The first was a modification of the motorized-patrol approach to
policing that was being promoted as a modern bureaucratic alternative to the old
foot-patrol policing when the war on crime began. Now instead of responding to
dispatched calls for assistance, police in cars or on foot would use their own
authority to engage individuals that they suspected of being involved in crime,
generally on starkly racial grounds. n90 Along with even more aggressive methods
like the use of undercover police as decoys, the new methods decoupled
convictions (and thus potential imprisonments) from the responses of ordinary
residents and produced a flow of potential prisoners far larger than could be
produced by solving the kinds of serious crimes people report to the police. The
Supreme Court removed any potential legal impediments through its decisions
upholding virtually complete police discretion to use any kind of criminal
violation as the basis for their stops, removing any potential judicial check on
aggressive police use of this power. n91

    [*1094]  Mandatory minimums - an idea developed in the first Nixon crime
bills, n92 expanded in the Reagan years, and heavily promoted to the states n93
- distorted the whole structure of sentencing upward. In many instances they
were built into complex matrix systems fixing a sentencing range based on crime
level and criminal history score. These systems were designed originally to
assure horizontal equity among individuals, but now incorporated extreme
punishments with no judicial discretion to respond to significant individual
differences. As Hinton notes, a certain kind of color-blind antidiscrimination
principle had become a core part of the national canon in the 1980s, and
mandatory sentences could be seen as protecting individuals from disparate
judicial treatment due to race (although it did nothing to control prosecutorial
selection). n94

   C. Resistance

 Hinton's story, although anchored in the strategies of the federal government,
does not ignore the role of resistance. We have already discussed her focus on
urban uprisings as - even more than any perceived rise in individual violent
crimes - helping to define the war on crime. n95 Most of the riots began as
collective protest action against the existing indignities imposed by the
policing of the 1960s, generally triggered by an in-itself-not-extraordinary
attempt to exercise police arrest powers. n96 The result was a further
strengthening of the most offensive elements of that policing model. Political
activists within the black community, like the Black Panthers, tried to
discipline resistance to police violence into sustainable legal practices but
were met with criminalization and sometimes murder. n97 They also offered
alternative security proposals for segregated neighborhoods of concentrated
poverty that did not rely on enhanced policing but instead on community
organization. n98 These stories of resistance, long covered over by the success
of the mass incarceration project, are important to recover as we consider what
should succeed it. The Black Panthers' appeal to create popular patrols  [*1095]
to protect black neighborhoods from both crime and police may have new relevance
as we consider the paradox that despite extraordinary levels of public spending
on police, most homicides go unsolved in segregated neighborhoods of
concentrated poverty.

   III. Ending Mass Incarceration

 Hinton's account is both sobering and inspiring for those of us who want to see
the current interest in criminal justice reform achieve enough momentum to undo
the tremendous changes in the American carceral state wrought by the
war-on-crime era. Her comprehensive account of the now-forgotten first half of
the war on crime (the Clinton Era would add another layer, including 100,000
more urban police) n99 raises serious questions about whether many of the most
popular reform approaches can truly break with the past. Yet in capturing the
criminological climate of the mid-1960s with some nuance, Hinton reminds us that
significant reductions in the use of imprisonment and the need for major reforms
of policing both seemed possible, even urgent, on the eve of the war on crime
despite rising crime rates.

   A. Evidence Based Law Enforcement

 One of the most resonant themes in criminal justice reform today is refocusing
policing and incarceration based on empirically tested strategies. n100 In part,
the emphasis on recidivism and how to reduce it is a counterbalance to the
extremism of the 1990s when laws like California's Three-Strikes gave
prosecutors largely unaccountable discretion to decide when to use life
sentences. n101 But establishing empirical evidence for effective policing and
rehabilitative programs was also a major goal of federal funding during the
first half of the war on crime. n102 This wave of research tended to reproduce
the patterns established by police and  [*1096]  prosecutorial discretion in the
form of arrest and conviction statistics and to undermine hopes for alternatives
like rehabilitation. n103

   An important component of these evidence-based strategies is their focus on
statistical risk assessment. In the face of chronic overcrowding in many of the
nation's prison systems (including the federal system) and jails, actuarial risk
assessment is being reexamined with enthusiasm by reformers as a way to reduce
incarcerated populations while rationalizing a system that, from the pretrial
phase to the distribution of lengthy prison sentence enhancements, has little
rational relationship to risk. n104 The revival of what Malcolm Feeley and I
called "the new penology" is another sign of how deeply the legitimacy of the
U.S. carceral state has been shaken. n105 Yet as Hinton's history reminds us,
this refocusing of law enforcement and custody on "high risk" categories of
people who can reliably be identified using ready-at-hand bureaucratic
information is the repetition of a theme that has run throughout the war on
crime period - that of beating crime by incapacitating its most active
participants. Repeatedly, and despite relying on somewhat different theories and
methods, this search for the dangerous has always rediscovered the priority of
maintaining surveillance and control over young black people, especially men
living in segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty. There is every
reason to fear that renewed actuarialism would "rediscover" the same priorities.
After all, as Hinton argues throughout, the intensification of policing of these
suspect classes in these neighborhoods has produced in criminal records a
knowledge foundation for an enduring, indeed inescapable, racial profile. n106

   B. War on Violence

 Another way that reformers are seeking to save the carceral state from its
current legitimacy crisis by rationalizing it is by refocusing the war on crime
to violence by abandoning the war on drugs, which was a diversion. n107 In fact,
the system has steadily been deemphasizing the war on drugs since the end of the
1990s (although as a legal matter it remains fully in place and weaponized),
n108 and our long experiment in incentivizing policing drug  [*1097]  seizures
almost certainly was a diversion from solving serious and violent crimes (not to
mention alienating most of the community members whose cooperation would be
necessary to solve those crimes). Yet as Hinton's account deftly shows, the war
on drugs was always bound up with the same racialized construction of the
serious crime problem that has been growing in political and scientific
authority since the Kennedy Administration. n109 The war on drugs was always
rationalized as a way to harness federal funds and legal authority to go after
local persons that were believed to be involved in serious and violent crime.
n110 As defenders of "broken windows" policing continue to argue even now,
aggressive policing against drugs and other "low-level" crimes can provide a
lever on serious crime through various theoretical mechanisms of deterrence and
incapacitation. n111 Moreover, a refocusing on violent crime is almost certain
to retain the racialized concentration of policing and the racial makeup of the
carceral population while naturalizing a punitive sentencing structure that
makes little sense in terms of penological objectives.

   C. Supervision

 The very disrepute that incarceration - especially imprisonment - now endures
is such that a tempting pathway of reform is to substitute forms of carceral
supervision over people convicted or convictable of crimes as an alternative to
incarceration. Historically, probation as an alternative or sequel to jail, or
as a substitute for imprisonment (when it follows prison carceral supervision it
is often known as parole but terminology differs from state to state) has meant
being subject to special conditions, more or less active supervision by a
correctional agent, and the possibility of deeper sanctioning, including
incarceration, based on a summary administrative procedure. n112 It has often
been associated with efforts to help those being supervised achieve a
sustainable crime-free life in the community but with deeply inadequate  [*1098]
resources to make a credible job of that. n113 Politically shifting from
incarceration to supervision avoids crossing the potential red line of declaring
these highly criminalized people no longer a presumptive menace to society, and
therein lies its true failing as a solution to the present crisis. As Hinton
shows, carceral supervision, either by police or probation (or the whole of what
Victor Rios calls the "youth control complex"), n114 has been the overarching
goal of the federal government's war on crime. n115 These methods go back to the
Progressive Era, when they were imagined as a necessary extension of social
control over immigrants and minority citizens whose capacity for self-government
was doubted by the scientific racism then part of the dominant intellectual
framework of state power. n116 The war on crime brought the federal government
and its financing and expertise into expanding this sector. The emphasis on
incarceration was a distinct part of this overall strategy. A shift back to
greater reliance on supervision may save the system some money and avoid some of
the inhumanity brought on by overcrowding of prisons, but it leaves whole
communities in daily exposure to degrading treatment by the carceral state.
Almost anyone living in a segregated neighborhood of concentrated poverty is
exposed to having their home searched or car stopped because they are, or are
near someone, under correctional supervision. Carceral supervision also remains
a major pathway to incarceration.

   D. Abolition

 If recovering the fuller history of the war on crime requires us to abandon
some of the narrowest understandings of mass incarceration and therefore
question the adequacy of some of the politically easiest approaches to reforming
the American carceral state, it also invites us to consider whether a far more
substantial departure might be possible. As Hinton shows, the consensus within
the carceral state and its related fields of expertise on the eve of the war on
crime was for substantial shifts in the dominant twentieth-century models of
carceral control. n117

    [*1099]  Urban police-professionalization-oriented police executives
imagined a new, more modern, and organizational model of policing built around
the automobile and radio dispatch. By pulling police out of their embedded
positions in neighborhood precincts, the new approach promoted in Los Angeles
and Chicago sought to shorten response times and arrest more suspects in action
rather than waiting for victims to discover crimes often hours after the events.
n118 This model also was used to break up an older model based on local police
stations and foot-based patrols that was long associated with both corruption
and racial arbitrariness. n119 It was also promoted as capable of deterring
crime through shortening response times and increasing the chances of police
observing a crime in progress. n120 By the 1980s it would be framed as the
failed old order against which a neotraditionalist model of problem-oriented
community policing was posed as an answer. n121

   In retrospect this reform view appears to have overstated the degree to which
this model was ever fully implemented or tested and understated how much it was
overtaken by a war on crime that promoted more aggressive neighborhood policing
that could be disguised as community policing. Going forward, we could do worse
things than reinvent mid-twentieth-century efforts to make police truly modern
and bureaucratic. As an organization, policing never has been made fully
bureaucratic in the Weberian sense of being subject to rules and accountability
as police shootings in questionable circumstances n122 and continuing scandals
around  [*1100]  homophobic and racist text messages in San Francisco exemplify.
n123 Returning police to a more responsive role and using technologies to break
up racialized presumptions that shape law enforcement through forms of
randomization might provide at least a valuable interim approach to breaking the
hold of racial profiling on contemporary policing.

   Conclusion

 Observers frequently mistake the policies of the federal government as the
story of government in our nation. This is especially true of criminal law and
punishment, where government is particularly inapt. The vast majority of
prisoners are under state custody, and the laws and policies that imprisoned
them are the products of state legislatures, county prosecutors, and local
police. Indeed, it takes a concerted, multifront campaign for the federal
government to influence - let alone transform - something as intrinsically state
and local as the American carceral state. Elizabeth Hinton's From the War on
Poverty to the War on Crime: The Making of Mass Incarceration provides a far
more detailed account and strong interpretation of the extraordinary campaign
led by a series of presidential administrations of both parties and,
importantly, championed by the presidents themselves and their attorneys
general. This project of reversing the presumptive rise in crime, especially in
American cities, seemed unlikely from the start given that the kinds of crimes
receiving political attention - robberies, burglaries, and homicides - are among
the most local of activities, and as noted, completely under local authorities
to recognize (or not) and respond to. Although this project never succeeded by
its own terms in reducing crime rates, which didn't begin to fall significantly
until the mid-1990s and then appeared unrelated to war-on-crime innovations, it
did work to transform the American carceral state into the punitive juggernaut
it had become by the turn of the twentieth century and largely remains.

   That it worked is a triumph of soft power in the interest of hard power; the
power of incentives, ideas, and identities to drive a vast investment of state
and local dollars in prisons and the infrastructure of criminal courts necessary
to keep them filled. The first step in this, one taken early in the Johnson
Administration, was to make police officers the key "recruiters" for
participants in the federal government's effort to pacify the big cities ahead
of multiple uprisings or even a sustained insurgency. n124 With federal funds
[*1101]  supporting the hiring of more police officers and providing more
hardware for them to use to suppress rioting and arrest criminal suspects, the
scale of urban policing expanded enormously in the decade between the mid-1960s
and mid-1970s. This happened despite grave concerns within the federal
government itself about the incompetence and racism of local police forces and
with no substantial commitment to reform them. Under Nixon this criminalization
wave was reinforced, and the goal of turning those arrests into successful
prosecutions and convictions, and imposing longer prison sentences was firmly
established as best practice. n125 By the time Ford took over from Nixon, after
the latter's own conduct became subject to criminal accusations and the
likelihood of impeachment increased, mass incarceration as a project was already
fully weaponized and ready to go, firmly embraced by both parties, with a few
issues, like the death penalty, subject to party debate.

   By the time Presidents Reagan and George H.W. Bush renewed the war-on-drugs
brand and tied it to the new folk devils of urban decline (crack-cocaine dealers
and users), prison populations in the states were rising rapidly, and the core
focus on youth of color in segregated neighborhoods of concentrated poverty was
firmly established. n126 The Reagan-Bush rhetoric made it easy for
contemporaneous observers to blame the increasingly visible problem of prison
population growth on right-wing politics and its obsession with the dangers and
moral impurities of drugs.

   Hinton's meticulous recovery of the first phase of the war on crime arrives
at a perfect time to help ground the debate about future criminal justice
reform. Many of the most "promising" and politically popular reforms involve
rolling back the war on drugs that Reagan and Bush branded and which President
Clinton sustained with his eager expansion of the police force. n127 Many of
these proposals, if implemented more fully, would move us back toward the
war-on-crime strategies of the Ford and Carter years. That might remove the most
discredited and indefensible features of mass incarceration, but it would leave
the basic political project of governing American cities through the
surveillance and carceral control of the potential criminality of black (and
other marginalized) youth fully operational. While progress requires action at
the state level, Hinton reminds us why we need a national movement to end the
war on crime.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Administrative LawSeparation of PowersExecutive ControlsCriminal Law &
ProcedureCriminal OffensesWeaponsGeneral OverviewGovernmentsLocal
GovernmentsPolice Power

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Right 16 (Stephen Houlgate ed., T.M. Knox
trans., Oxford Univ. Press 2008) (1821).





n2.  See Jeffrey S. Adler, Less Crime, More Punishment: Violence, Race, and
Criminal Justice in Early Twentieth-Century America, 102 J. Am. Hist. 34, 35
(2015) (quantitatively studying the relationship between crime and punishment in
the early twentieth century); Robert T. Chase, We Are Not Slaves: Rethinking the
Rise of Carceral States Through the Lens of the Prisoners' Rights Movement, 102
J. Am. Hist. 73, 74-75 (2015) (surveying prisoners' rights movements in the
South in the 1970s and 1980s "through the lens of prisoner-initiated civil
rights complaints and social protest"); Miroslava Chavez-Garcia, Youth of Color
and California's Carceral State: The Fred C. Nelles Youth Correctional Facility,
102 J. Am. Hist. 47, 48 (2015) (discussing the use of scientific research
methods to prevent and suppress crime in California in the early twentieth
century); Kali Nicole Gross, African American Women, Mass Incarceration and the
Politics of Protection, 102 J. Am. Hist. 25, 26 (2015) (outlining the historical
treatment of African-American women in the prison system); Torrie Hester,
Deportability and the Carceral State, 102 J. Am. Hist. 141, 141 (2015)
(describing how immigration-related crimes have come to represent the leading
cause of imprisonment in the federal system, overtaking drug-related crimes);
Kelly Lytle Hernandez et al., Introduction: Constructing the Carceral State, 102
J. Am. Hist. 18, 20-21 (2015) (introducing the historical background of mass
incarceration); Elizabeth Hinton, "A War within Our Own Boundaries": Lyndon
Johnson's Great Society and the Rise of the Carceral State, 102 J. Am. Hist.
100, 112 (2015)(describing the legacy of the Great Society's "punitive
transformation of domestic urban policy" and its effect on African-Americans and
the youth of America); Julilly Kohler-Hausmann, Guns and Butter: The Welfare
State, The Carceral State, and the Politics of Exclusion in the Postwar United
States, 102 J. Am. Hist. 87, 87-88 (2015) (arguing for "approaching the dramatic
growth of the carceral system and welfare state retrenchment of recent decades
as historically intertwined phenomena"); Matthew D. Lassiter, Impossible
Criminals: The Suburban Imperative of America's War on Drugs, 102 J. Am. Hist.
126, 127-28 (2015) (reviewing how the war on drugs has safeguarded young,
usually white, middle-class drug users and penalized urban minority operations);
Alex Lichtenstein, Flocatex and the Fiscal Limits of Mass Incarceration: Toward
a New Political Economy of the Postwar Carceral State, 102 J. Am. Hist. 113,
113-14 (2015) (discussing how historians have begun to define mass incarceration
as a defining and troubling feature of the twentieth century); Donna Murch,
Crack in Los Angeles: Crisis, Militarization, and Black Response to the Late
Twentieth-Century War on Drugs, 102 J. Am. Hist. 162, 163 (2015) (examining the
history of the response of African-American communities in Los Angeles to the
militarization of the war on drugs); Micol Siegel, Objects of Police History,
102 J. Am. Hist. 152, 152 (2015) (exploring the history of the Office of Public
Safety, a now-inactive federal agency, whose former employees have led the
militarization of U.S. police forces); Timothy Stewart-Winter, Queer Law and
Order: Sex, Criminality, and Policing in Late Twentieth-Century United States,
102 J. Am. Hist. 61, 61-62 (2015) (studying the "neglected intersection of the
histories of sexuality and the carceral state" in the 1970s); Heather Ann
Thompson, Why Mass Incarceration Matters: Rethinking Crisis, Decline, and
Transformation in Postwar American History, 97 J. Am. Hist. 703, 703-04 (2010)
(examining the social, political, and economic impact of mass incarceration in
the twentieth century).





n3.  Brown v. Plata, 563 U.S. 493, 545 (2011).





n4.  Elizabeth Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime: The Making
of Mass Incarceration in America (2016).





n5.  See, e.g., Katherine Beckett, Making Crime Pay: Law and Order in
Contemporary American Politics 28-43 (1997) (describing the history of crime
control in the United States and the use of the crime issue in national politics
by Republicans); David Garland, The Culture of Control: Crime and Social Order
in Contemporary Society 55-60 (2001) (describing the American critique of
correctionalism that emerged in the 1970s); Ruth Wilson Gilmore, Golden Gulag:
Prison, Surplus, Crisis and Opposition in Globalizing California 5-7 (2007)
(discussing the growth and costs of California's prison system, which grew
almost 500% between 1982 and 2000 and built twenty-three new major prisons
between 1984 and 2007); Stuart A. Scheingold, The Politics of Law and Order:
Street Crime and Public Policy 75-88 (1984) (considering the history of the
politicization of crime and law and order); Jonathan Simon, Governing Through
Crime: How the War on Crime Transformed American Democracy and Created a Culture
of Fear 89-106 (2007) (describing the legislative shift beginning in 1968 from
the war on poverty to the war on crime); Franklin E. Zimring & Gordon Hawkins,
The Scale of Imprisonment 156-75 (1991) (discussing the impact of criminal
justice policies that were designed to affect prison populations in the United
States).





n6.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 219-20.





n7.  Id. at 2-4, 314-21.





n8.  See id. at 2-3 (describing the policy shift from a progressive trajectory
to more aggressive and exhaustive policing practices targeting black urban areas
that began during the Johnson Administration).





n9.  See generally Mona Lynch, Sunbelt Justice: Arizona and the Transformation
of American Punishment (2010) (discussing Arizona's historical use of punitive
strategies to combat crime); Heather Schoenfeld, Mass Incarceration and the
Paradox of Prison Conditions Litigation, 44 Law & Soc'y Rev. 731 (2010)
(studying the effect of prison litigation on mass incarceration in Florida).





n10.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 87-89, 163-79.





n11.  Id. at 2.





n12.  For earlier studies of the war on crime, see Scheingold, supra note 5, at
196-97 (discussing sentencing guidelines and the effects they may have on future
criminal court reform).





n13.  Malcolm M. Feeley & Austin D. Sarat, The Policy Dilemma: Federal Crime
Policy and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, 1968-1978, at 5-6
(1980) (discussing the failure of the Safe Streets Act of 1968).





n14.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 333-35.





n15.  Matt Ford, What Caused the Great Crime Decline in the U.S.?, Atlantic
(Apr. 15, 2016),
http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/04/what-caused-the-crime-declin
e/477408/ [https://perma.cc/KTB3-7B2M].





n16.  See, e.g., Platform, Movement for Black Lives,
https://policy.m4bl.org/platform/ [https://perma.cc/EG52-KJRQ].





n17.  See Exec. Order No. 12,958, 60 Fed. Reg. 19825, 19828-29, 19832 (Apr. 17,
1995) (requiring most classified information to be made public after twenty-five
years); Matt Elton, When Does History End?, Historyextra (Oct. 28, 2009),
http://www.historyextra.com/feature/when-does-history-end
[https://perma.cc/8EJP-4QDD] (presenting views of history professors on when an
event is subject to historical analysis, such as, in the view of one scholar,
thirty years).





n18.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 3-4 (describing the quick evolution from
Kennedy's attack on delinquency to Johnson's "War on Poverty" to Nixon's
punishing policies).





n19.  See id. at 3, 12, 20-48 (describing the history and development of
Kennedy's attack on delinquency and its role as the beginning of increasing
efforts to reduce poverty and crime).





n20.  See id. at 45-46 (describing the antidelinquency efforts which included
providing social services in settings that would reduce stigma while addressing
the societal problems such as illiteracy and unemployment that often resulted in
delinquency).





n21.  See id. at 39-48 (detailing President Kennedy's efforts to reduce the risk
of youths to fall into delinquency through "Mobilization for Youth").





n22.  See id. at 49 (noting that the urban intervention was a relatively small
effort, only funding programs in sixteen cities, with goals to transform both
urban social institutions and individuals).





n23.  See id. at 61-62 (describing the efforts to merge the war on crime and the
war on poverty).





n24.  See id. at 56-57, 61-62, 87-88, 99 (describing President Johnson's Law
Enforcement Assistance Act of 1965 and the large amount of training and monetary
aid sent to police forces as a result of the program).





n25.  See id. at 103-06 (describing President Johnson's adoption of a "middle
ground" between more social programs and improvements in law enforcement).





n26.  See id. at 134 (explaining that lawmakers had "already begun to retreat
from social welfare interventions" during the Johnson Administration).





n27.  See id. at 134-38, 163-79 (providing an overview of President Nixon's
actions regarding crime, including the District of Columbia Court Reorganization
Act of 1970 and large investments into police, courts, and corrections
departments).





n28.  Id. at 252-53, 305-06 (noting that President Ford's efforts to reduce
crime related mostly to sentencing and incarceration, while Presidents Carter's
efforts centered among police-community tensions and relations).





n29.  Id. at 80-81.





n30.  Id. at 66-77, 108, 115, 131-33 (detailing the Watts Riots, surrounding
events, and resulting consequences).





n31.  See id. at 67-68 (detailing the destruction that occurred during the Watts
uprising and noting that the damage was concentrated on stores and shops owned
by whites, while public buildings in the black neighborhoods suffered minimal
damage).





n32.  Id. at 87.





n33.  Id. at 58-61.





n34.  The Johnson Administration saw the riots as evidence black nationalists
and revolutionaries were gaining ground and that his liberal social agenda was
in danger. His solution was to accelerate the war on crime. Id. at 112.





n35.  See Michael W. Flamm, From Harlem to Ferguson: LBJ's War on Crime and
America's Prison Crisis, Origins: Current Events in Hist. Persp. (Apr. 2015),
http://origins.osu.edu
/article/harlem-ferguson-lbjs-war-crime-and-americas-prison-crisis
[https://perma.cc/H3EW-E6DF] (quoting a New York City detective as stating: "I
hope this doesn't happen, but more Americans may get killed in Harlem this
summer [1964] than in Vietnam"); Robert Higgs, The Vietnam War and the Drug War:
America's Futile Crusades, Indep. Inst. (Apr. 20, 1995),
http://www.independent.org/newsroom/article.asp?id=330
[https://perma.cc/2BSD-XV8N] (noting the parallels between the Vietnam war and
the war on drugs).





n36.  See, e.g., William Julius Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City,
the Underclass, and Public Policy 3-4 (1987) (explaining the difficulty
describing or classifying the problems of minorities in the inner city).





n37.  See Office of Policy Planning & Research, U.S. Dep't of Labor, The Negro
Family: The Case for National Action 15-19, 29-45 (1965) (widely known as The
Moynihan Report) (discussing the "tangle of pathology" resulting from family
structures caused by a history of slavery and discrimination).





n38.  See, e.g., Hinton, supra note 4, at 64 (noting the use of the Army and
National Guard to reinforce police officers in South Central Los Angeles during
the Watts Riots).





n39.  See id. at 87-88 (discussing the militarization and increase in manpower
of state and local law enforcement arising from federal funding in the wake of
the Watts Riots).





n40.  See id. at 87-88, 140 (discussing Johnson's and Nixon's commitments to
investing in local law enforcement).





n41.  Id. at 87-88.





n42.  See George L. Kelling & James Q. Wilson, Broken Windows: The Police and
Neighborhood Safety, Atlantic (Mar. 1982),
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/304465/
[https://perma.cc/J59L-Q6WE].





n43.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 289.





n44.  See Bureau of Justice Assistance, Understanding Community Policing: A
Framework for Action, Nat'l Crim. Just. Reference Serv., at vii (Aug. 1994),
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles/commp.pdf [https://perma.cc/MP5R-8CD7] (defining
community policing as a policing policy consisting of community partnership and
problem solving); What is POP?, Ctr. for Problem-Oriented Policing,
http://www.popcenter.org/about/?p=whatiscpop [https://perma.cc/S3CK-Y6TX]
(defining problem-oriented policing as an approach that targets discrete problem
areas and subjects those areas to "microscopic examination" to develop an
effective strategy in addressing the problems).





n45.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 23 (discussing CompStat and other statistical
programs that aid police in predicting criminal activity).





n46.  Id. at 182. Parker was deeply racist, and Wilson was not. Both ran
departments so deeply committed to white supremacy at that point that the
Chiefs' philosophies may have mattered little. Id. at 70; see Gary Potter, The
History of Policing in the United States, Part 5 (July 23, 2013),
http://plsonline.eku.edu/insidelook/history-policing-united-states-part-5
[https://perma.cc/QLN4-9SVQ] (reporting why Wilson's race-neutral vision of
police professionalism actually resulted in routinely targeting young, minority
males).





n47.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 182.





n48.  See id. at 160, 183, 338 (discussing the drastic increase in foot
patrolmen, a majority of whom were white and concentrated in urban areas, that
occurred during the war on crime and the resulting "disproportionate numbers of
African Americans that received criminal records and prison sentences").





n49.  See generally id. at 180-217.





n50.  See generally Edward J. Epstein, Agency of Fear: Opiates and Political
Power in America 18-20 (2d ed. 1990) (remarking on the ODALE's odd origins and
"extra-legal" powers); Edward J. Littlejohn, Law and Police Misconduct, 58 U.
Det. J. Urb. L. 173, 208-19 (1981) (discussing the rise and fall of STRESS);
Mark D. Rosenbaum & Daniel P. Tokaji, Healing the Blind Goddess: Race and
Criminal Justice, 98 Mich. L. Rev. 1941, 1942 (2000) (reviewing David Cole, No
Equal Justice: Race and Class in the American Criminal Justice System (1999))
(pointing to the "lawlessness of the CRASH Unit and the numerous dubious
convictions obtained as a result").





n51.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 115.





n52.  Id. at 117.





n53.  Id. at 248-49.





n54.  Id. at 254-55.





n55.  See Simon, supra note 5, at 54 (describing the Ford and Carter
Administrations as "a time-out in the escalation of the war on crime," and
noting that both administrations "sought to model an executive of limitations
and legality").





n56.  See Malcolm M. Feeley & Jonathan Simon, The New Penology: Notes on the
Emerging Strategy of Corrections and Its Implications, 30 Criminology 449,
458-59 (1992) (describing the shift in American incarceration strategy toward
statistical prediction, concern with groups, strategies of management, and
labeling the new strategy as the "new penology").





n57.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 27-32 (discussing the alternative strategies
considered by the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations that would have focused on
urban-youth issues more comprehensively).





n58.  Id. at 124-27. Perhaps reflecting Johnson's own contending ideas, the
Kerner Commission included many more civil rights-oriented liberals than the
earlier and more determinative Crime Commission. Id. at 127.





n59.  See id. at 206 (noting how the Los Angeles chapter of the Black Panther
Party provided free healthcare, food, and other much-needed services in
segregated urban neighborhoods).





n60.  See Thomas J. Sugrue, The Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality
in Postwar Detroit 4 (First Princeton Classics ed. 2014) (introducing the
various explanations for the decline of Northern cities).





n61.  See Mike Davis, City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles
226-36 (2d ed. 2006) (discussing the "spatial apartheid" now visible in many
post-modern cities).





n62.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 85 (noting how disproportionately high police
attention paid to segregated neighborhoods in the 1960s resulted in an increase
in reported crimes).





n63.  See id. at 191-202 (detailing how Detroit law enforcement's decoy program
"demonstrated the violent consequences of decoy squads"). This came to mind
recently when reporting on Brazil and the Rio Olympics noted that police
killings in Rio amounted to 16% of the homicides in 2014. Nash Jenkins,
Brazilian Police Killed More Than 5,000 Civilians in Rio Between 2005 and 2014,
Report Says, Time (Aug. 4, 2015),
http://time.com/3983338/brazil-police-killed-civilians-rio/
[https://perma.cc/3Q87-8KEA].





n64.  See Jonathan Simon, Policing After Civil Rights: The Legacy of Police
Opposition to the Civil Rights Movement for Contemporary American Policing, in
The SAGE Handbook of Global Policing 373, 373-87 (Ben Bradford et al. eds.,
2016) (outlining the historical relationship between race relations and law
enforcement).





n65.  See Sugrue, supra note 60, at 5-6, 143-52 (discussing the deteriorated
condition of Northern cities, specifically Detroit, post-World War II).





n66.  See sources cited supra note 2.





n67.  Heather Ann Thompson, Blood in the Water: The Attica Uprising of 1971 and
its Legacy (2016). See generally Dan Berger, Captive Nation: Black Prison
Organizing in the Civil Rights Era (2014) (examining the history of black
activism and organizing in prison); Keramet Reiter, 23/7: Pelican Bay and the
Rise of Long-term Solitary Confinement (2016) (exploring the history of the
Pelican Bay prison in California).





n68.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 185.





n69.  See generally Edward C. Banfield, The Unheavenly City (2d ed. 1970).





n70.  See James Q. Wilson, "What Works?" Revisited: New Findings on Criminal
Rehabilitation, Pub. Int., Fall 1980, at 3, 17 (suggesting that stricter
punishments may produce desirable changes in the "serious, chronic delinquent");
Kelling & Wilson, supra note 42 (advocating police efforts to maintain "order"
and enforce the letter of the law may, in turn, reduce the rates of violent and
other serious crimes).





n71.  See James Q. Wilson & Richard J. Herrenstein, Crime and Human Nature: The
Definitive Study of the Causes of Crime 461-68 (1985) (acknowledging the higher
rates of crime among African-Americans and discussing several explanatory
theories); James Q. Wilson, Crime, in Beyond the Color Line: New Perspectives on
Race and Ethnicity in America 115, 123 (Abigail Thernstrom & Stephan Thernstrom
eds., 2002) (connecting higher per capita crime rates in black populations to
the "weak character" of "poor, badly educated, fatherless children").





n72.  John J. DiLulio Jr., The Coming of the Super-Predators, Wkly. Standard
(Nov. 27, 1995),
http://www.weeklystandard.com/the-coming-of-the-super-predators/ article/8160
[https: //perma.cc/8W3Y-SJSG] (connecting the emergence of "super-predators" to
"moral poverty," including families with "no father in the home").





n73.  See generally Daniel Patrick Moynihan, The Negro Family: The Case for
National Action (1965).





n74.  See id. at 29-30 (asserting that the "resurgence" of post-slavery black
populations would be "doomed to frustration unless the viability of the Negro
family is restored"); Wilson, supra note 71, at 123 (blaming the "weak
character" at the root of black crime largely on the prevalence of "unmarried
mothers" and "fathers who will [not] help raise their children").





n75.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 58-62 (discussing the ever-increasing
surveillance and police patrols that occurred in segregated neighborhoods that
resulted in racial inequalities).





n76.  See Richard A. Cloward & Lloyd E. Ohlin, Delinquency and Opportunity: A
Theory of Delinquent Gangs 150-52 (3d prtg. 1963) (hypothesizing that, were
disadvantaged adolescents given ample "legitimate means" of achieving success
and were "illegal or criminal means" not readily available, criminal subcultures
would not develop amongst those adolescents).





n77.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 84 (recounting that despite input from "a few
amenable academics" in the 1960s, "the criminal justice and law enforcement
community almost exclusively shaped" the government's perspective on crime).





n78.  See Marvin E. Wolfgang et al., Delinquency in a Birth Cohort 245 (1972)
(finding that, more than education level, changes in residence and school, and
I.Q., race and socioeconomic status "were most strongly related to the
offender-nonoffender classification").





n79.  See id. at 248 (finding that 18% of the cohort were "chronic offenders,"
responsible for more than 50% of offenses, and that nonwhites were five times
more likely to be chronic offenders).





n80.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 224-26 (highlighting federal policy makers'
disregard of Wolfgang's reliance on contact with police as a proxy for
delinquency, despite "the fact that African Americans were more likely to be
stopped by police on "suspicion,' to be assaulted verbally or physically, and to
be arrested").





n81.  Id. at 123 (quoting then-Crime Commission Director Vorenberg as warning
against creating "a self-fulfilling prophecy" by labeling youth as delinquents).





n82.  Id. at 241 (quoting Professor Zimring as warning of the likelihood that
the 1980s would see disparate numbers of minority youth in juvenile and adult
correctional facilities).





n83.  See id. at 123 (rebuking war-on-crime policy makers, including Vorenberg
himself, as "largely blinded" from policy alternatives "outside of the punitive
realm").





n84.  See id. at 126 (discussing the Kerner Commission's evaluation of available
policy options and noting the Commission's preference for structural changes).





n85.  Michel Foucault, Truth and Power, Interview with Alessandro Fontana &
Pasquale Pasquino, in Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings
1972-1977, at 109, 128-29 (Colin Gordon ed., 1980) ("The "universal'
intellectual derives from the jurist or notable, and finds his fullest
manifestation in the writer, the bearer of values and significations in which
all can recognize themselves. The "specific' intellectual derives from quite
another figure, not the jurist or notable, but the savant or expert.").





n86.  See Silvan S. Schweber, Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius
198 (2008) (discussing Foucault's initial classification of Oppenheimer as a
"specific intellectual" for his work as a "scientist-statesman" on the first two
atomic bombs before Oppenheimer reverted back to a "universal intellectual"
concentrating on "the nature of scientific knowledge and on the relation between
science and society" after his security clearance was revoked).





n87.  Foucault, supra note 85, at 127-28 (discussing the specific intellectual's
ability to intervene in discourse due to specific and relevant knowledge).





n88.  See Elizabeth Hinton, Why We Should Reconsider the War on Crime, Time
(Mar. 20, 2015), http://time.com/3746059/war-on-crime-history/
[https://perma.cc/ZE3Y-35HX] (detailing the expansion of federal action in local
policing and incarceration policies through programs of agencies such as the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration).





n89.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 82, 138.





n90.  See id. at 128-29 (relating the Kerner Commission's findings that the
techniques used by police patrols including stop-and-frisk may be used
indiscriminately, resulting in racial harassment).





n91.  See Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 124-26 (2000) (finding unprovoked
flight from an area of heavy narcotics trafficking may justify being detained by
the police); Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 22-24 (1968) (explaining that a police
officer may detain an individual on the basis of reasonable suspicion that the
individual may have or is about to commit criminal behavior even though the
officer does not yet have probable cause to make an arrest). Even noncriminal
violations such as traffic stops have been found to justify searches for drugs,
see for example, Ohio v. Robinette, 519 U.S. 33, 38-39 (1996) (allowing for
searches of a person's car for contraband following a speeding violation without
having to explain that individuals may be free to leave), and California v.
Acevedo, 500 U.S. 565, 579 (1991) (eliminating the previous requirement for a
warrant when searching closed containers in automobiles).





n92.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 138.





n93.  Id. at 272.





n94.  Id. at 271.





n95.  See supra text accompanying notes 27-38.





n96.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 55-56.





n97.  See id. at 149, 205-07 (describing the methods used by law enforcement to
disrupt the activities of the Black Panther Party and similar activist groups).





n98.  See id. at 9 (describing the Black Panthers as calling for "armed
self-defense," as well as the difference between how black activists and
federal, state, and local authorities responded to crime).





n99.  See David Yassky, Opinion, Unlocking the Truth About the Clinton Crime
Bill, N.Y. Times (Apr. 9, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/10/opinion/campaign-stops/unlocking-the-truth-ab
out-the-clinton-crime-bill.html [https://perma.cc/3TTV-SY4N] (relating the
specifics of the 1994 Crime Bill signed by President Clinton).





n100.  See, e.g., Kamala D. Harris, Smart on Crime: A Career Prosecutor's Plan
to Make Us Safer, 179-81 (2009) (detailing the use of data collection and other
empirical methods in discouraging and reducing open-air drug dealing in High
Point, North Carolina).





n101.  Franklin E. Zimring et al., Punishment and Democracy: Three Strikes and
You're Out in California 26-27 (2001) (detailing prosecutors' ability to use the
strike system to ensure higher sentences).





n102.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 79-86 (chronicling the role of Johnson's
Crime Commission in developing research to help produce effective legislative
policy in the early years of the war on crime).





n103.  See id. at 85-86 (explaining that the statistics the Crime Commission
relied upon to develop policing and incarceration policies were highly skewed
toward affirming then-existing views about such policies).





n104.  Feely & Simon, supra note 56, at 460-61.





n105.  See id. at 456 (noting that the new penology is a response to the
increase in demands "for rationality and accountability").





n106.  See Hinton supra note 4, at 23-25 (describing a system, which utilized
lists of minorities, that police used to profile and then justify arrests and
overpolicing of communities).





n107.  Jonathan Simon, Essay, Law's Violence, the Strong State, and the Crisis
of Mass Imprisonment (for Stuart Hall), 49 Wake Forest L. Rev. 649, 673-75
(2014).





n108.  See id. at 660-62 (noting that the proportion of African-Americans
imprisoned for drug crimes had decreased from 38.5% in 1991 to 36.8% in 2001 and
that, by 2006, the war on drugs was "under substantial political attack with
successful initiatives in several states in favor of treatment as an alternative
to jail or prison for drug crimes").





n109.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 12, 21-22 (commenting on the "Kennedy
administration's "total attack' on delinquency" as beginning "a series of direct
government interventions" in black communities, which led to the "mass
incarceration generation" of children born after the Civil Rights Era).





n110.  See id. at 215-16 (pointing out that the main rationalization for
arresting black Americans for petty crimes was to prevent inevitable future
violent or more serious crimes).





n111.  Kelling & Wilson, supra note 42 (discussing the link between unchecked
disorderly behavior, trust in the police, and serious crime).





n112.  See, e.g., Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. § 771.4 (West 2016) (providing for the
discretionary grant or revocation of probation); N.Y. Crim. Proc. Law § 410.91
(McKinney 2017) (requiring that a parole recipient "be placed under the
immediate supervision of the department of corrections and community supervision
and must comply with the conditions of parole"); Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Ann. art.
42.12 (West 2015) (providing for community supervision in some proceedings).





n113.  See Anthony C. Thompson, Navigating the Hidden Obstacles to Ex-Offender
Reentry, 45 B.C. L. Rev. 255, 256-57 (2004) (outlining the staggering number of
ex-offender reentries to communities that do not have the adequate resources to
supervise and assist integration into civilian life).





n114.  Victor M. Rios, Punished: Policing the Lives of Black and Latino Boys, at
xiv (2011).





n115.  See Hinton, supra note 4, at 3, 17, 34 (explaining that the main goal of
these enhanced crime-stopping initiatives was supervision and control of black
communities, specifically black youths).





n116.  Anthony M. Platt, The Childsavers: The Invention of Delinquency 36-45
(Expanded 40th Anniversary ed., Rutgers Univ. Press 2009) (1969).





n117.  See Hinton supra note 4, at 7-25 (chronicling the shift in perspectives
leading up to the war on crime that created a mindset that focused primarily on
crime in black communities).





n118.  See id. at 182 (noting the significant shift from the prevailing ideas of
the immediate postwar period in which reliance on police cars was more common
because it allowed greater mobility and quicker emergency responses than foot
patrols).





n119.  See id. at 187-88 (explaining how the mobility and professionalization of
the police force was a response to the high-corruption and turnover rates
propagated by community policing in the nineteenth century).





n120.  See id. at 182 (stating that the rationale behind the shift to motor
vehicles was decreased response times to emergencies and crimes as they were
being committed).





n121.  See id. at 182, 186-87 (describing the failure of mobilized patrols as a
result of the disconnect created between the police and their communities, and
explaining the rationale behind the increase in foot patrols in problem areas as
an effort to try and combat crime by monitoring identified problem areas).





n122.  See Christine Hauser, Man, 73, Shot Dead by Officer Had a Crucifix, Not a
Gun, Police Say, N.Y. Times (Dec. 15, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/15/us/man-73-shot-dead-by-officer-had-a-crucifix
-not-a-gun-police-say.html [https://perma.cc/35ZK-ELR6] (reporting that an
elderly man with dementia was shot by police and that he was holding a crucifix
instead of a gun); Ashley Southall, District Attorney Asks for Grand Jury in
Police Killing of Deborah Danner, N.Y. Times (Dec. 5, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/nyregion/district-attorney-asks-for-grand-jur
y-in-police-killing-of-deborah-danner.html [https://perma.cc/8A2R-6LVF]
(explaining why a district attorney asked for a special grand jury in a case
involving an officer who breached protocol when he shot a sixty-six-year-old
black woman who was acting erratically); Liam Stack, Video Released in Terence
Crutcher's Killing by Tulsa Police, N.Y. Times (Sept. 19, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/us/video-released-in-terence-crutchers-killin
g-by-tulsa-police.html?_r=0 [https://perma.cc/LM44-W4X2] (discussing the
shooting of an unarmed black man in Tulsa as he allegedly walked away from
officers with his hands up). See generally Max Weber, Economy and Society
(Guenther Roth & Claus Wittich eds., 1968).





n123.  Scott Glover & Dan Simon, "Wild Animals': Racist Texts Sent by San
Francisco Police Officer, Documents Show, CNN (Apr. 26, 2016),
http://www.cnn.com/2016/04/26/us/racist-texts-san-francisco-police-officer/
[https://perma.cc/95M5-9BZX] (detailing text messages sent to and from a police
officer that disparaged blacks, hispanics, Indians, gay police officers, and
residents of a largely minority and low-income district).





n124.  See supra note 33 and accompanying text.





n125.  See supra note 27 and accompanying text.





n126.  Hinton, supra note 4, at 314-21 (tying the emergence of crack to "the
cumulative impact of twenty years of disinvestment, neglect, and overpolicing"
and also noting that the Anti-Drug Abuse Act, adopted by the Reagan
administration and supported by Bush in his presidential bid, "specifically
designates "high risk youth' as a primary target group"; and noting "the
explosion in prison populations during the 1990s").





n127.  See supra note 99 and accompanying text.


                               5 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                             March 24, 2017 Friday

Predictive policing research gets a boost from \xA33m grant

LENGTH: 846 words

DATELINE: New York



 London: Imperial College London, United Kingdom has issued the following news
release:



  An Imperial mathematician is leading a new five-year program to test and
improve predictive policing and tackle other challenges for future cities.



 Predictive policing involves using maths and statistics to predict times and
places that serious crimes will occur based on historical crime data in a given
area, allowing police to efficiently allocate resources.



 "With more powerful models we can start to predict not just where, but when,
and what type of crime is likely to occur."



 - Professor Girolami



 A trial in Los Angeles was so successful at predicting and preventing crime
that UK authorities are investigating its use. Professor Mark Girolami, from the
Department of Mathematics at Imperial, is leading a consortium, called
Inference, Computation and Numerics for Insights into Cities (ICONIC), that
brings together researchers and policing partners. ICONIC has just been given a
£3m grant from the EPSRC.



 Hayley Dunning spoke to Professor Girolami about improving predictive policing
and how the maths used could translate to other aspects of city life in the
future.

 How has predictive policing been used so far and how can it be improved?



 Predictive policing has been used in California to identify crime hotspots
where serious crime is more likely to occur. For example, there's the 'broken
window effect', where areas of the city that are not looked after are more
attractive for certain crimes.



 These models are based on crime data and seem to work well, but we can make
improvements to provide greater levels of statistical validity of model-based
predictions. With more powerful models we can start to predict not just where,
but when, and what type of crime is likely to occur.



 We also need to quantify the amount of uncertainty in any of these predictions
so that police and policymakers can take these into account when deciding
whether to allocate resources based on them. Where the uncertainty is high, they
might want to rely more on their previous experience and knowledge of the
situation.

 Who are you working with on this project?



 We're partnering with the Universities of Oxford, Manchester and Strathclyde,
along with the Met, West Midlands, Scotland and New York police forces. We also
have on board software companies and the Home Office, who are very interested in
issues related to crime and security.



 Once we have some software to trial, we hope to deploy prototypes. This is why
we have a range of collaborating police forces to cover the UK.



 These police forces came to us. The police forces across the country are
looking at efficiencies in operations, so this work is very important. It's a
great opportunity to do some fantastic maths, but also to roll it out and have
impact on UK policing.

 It sounds like a great tool, but are there potential pitfalls to predictive
policing?



 There are certainly ethical issues to take into account. For example, some
police forces would like to be able to predict who might become a serial
offender, and make an intervention at an early stage to change the path
followed. The ethical issues are really huge there - should we even be thinking
about such interventions?



 The Alan Turing Institute have established a data ethics group, so we've set up
an initiative with them and West Midlands police to actually look at these
particular issues.



 There are also cultural differences, for example between the US and the UK,
that need to be taken into account when predicting crime. We can't just be
mathematicians working on theorems and proofs. We've brought in psychologists
and social scientists specifically so that we understand what psychological
processes are at play. What we're hoping to do is have that inform the models
that we build.



 I guess if we were working in some totalitarian state we wouldn't be worried
about the ethics of using data to profile people as to whether they were going
to be serial criminals or not - thankfully we don't and therefore this is a much
more constrained issue, and we really need to embed all of that in the
mathematical models we develop.

 What else could the tools be used for in future cities?



 We aim to focus on crime and policing for the first two years of the grant, but
after that we could expand the models' use to other areas of the city.



 For example, we have been approached by a leisure chain that has essentially
the same problem as the police force: when do we need more staff and where? With
powerful enough models, this could be predicted on an hourly basis.



 Models could also be used to assess the local economic impact of new
developments in a city, for example Imperial's new White City campus and its
associated infrastructure. We could ask questions about what should go alongside
- if a restaurant chain was thinking about opening up an outlet there for
example, what size should it be and where should they put it?



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com





LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               6 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                            March 22, 2017 Wednesday

Predictive policing research gets a boost from \xA33m grant

LENGTH: 821 words

DATELINE: New York



 London: Imperial College London, United Kingdom has issued the following news
release:



 Predictive policing involves using maths and statistics to predict times and
places that serious crimes will occur based on historical crime data in a given
area, allowing police to efficiently allocate resources.



 "With more powerful models we can start to predict not just where, but when,
and what type of crime is likely to occur."



 - Professor Girolami



 A trial in Los Angeles was so successful at predicting and preventing crime
that UK authorities are investigating its use. Professor Mark Girolami, from the
Department of Mathematics at Imperial, is leading a consortium, called
Inference, Computation and Numerics for Insights into Cities (ICONIC), that
brings together researchers and policing partners. ICONIC has just been given a
£3m grant from the EPSRC.



 Hayley Dunning spoke to Professor Girolami about improving predictive policing
and how the maths used could translate to other aspects of city life in the
future.

 How has predictive policing been used so far and how can it be improved?



 Predictive policing has been used in California to identify crime hotspots
where serious crime is more likely to occur. For example, there's the 'broken
window effect', where areas of the city that are not looked after are more
attractive for certain crimes.



 These models are based on crime data and seem to work well, but we can make
improvements to provide greater levels of statistical validity of model-based
predictions. With more powerful models we can start to predict not just where,
but when, and what type of crime is likely to occur.



 We also need to quantify the amount of uncertainty in any of these predictions
so that police and policymakers can take these into account when deciding
whether to allocate resources based on them. Where the uncertainty is high, they
might want to rely more on their previous experience and knowledge of the
situation.

 Who are you working with on this project?



 We're partnering with the Universities of Oxford, Manchester and Strathclyde,
along with the Met, West Midlands, Scotland and New York police forces. We also
have on board software companies and the Home Office, who are very interested in
issues related to crime and security.



 Once we have some software to trial, we hope to deploy prototypes. This is why
we have a range of collaborating police forces to cover the UK.



 These police forces came to us. The police forces across the country are
looking at efficiencies in operations, so this work is very important. It's a
great opportunity to do some fantastic maths, but also to roll it out and have
impact on UK policing.

 It sounds like a great tool, but are there potential pitfalls to predictive
policing?



 There are certainly ethical issues to take into account. For example, some
police forces would like to be able to predict who might become a serial
offender, and make an intervention at an early stage to change the path
followed. The ethical issues are really huge there - should we even be thinking
about such interventions?



 The Alan Turing Institute have established a data ethics group, so we've set up
an initiative with them and West Midlands police to actually look at these
particular issues.



 There are also cultural differences, for example between the US and the UK,
that need to be taken into account when predicting crime. We can't just be
mathematicians working on theorems and proofs. We've brought in psychologists
and social scientists specifically so that we understand what psychological
processes are at play. What we're hoping to do is have that inform the models
that we build.



 I guess if we were working in some totalitarian state we wouldn't be worried
about the ethics of using data to profile people as to whether they were going
to be serial criminals or not - thankfully we don't and therefore this is a much
more constrained issue, and we really need to embed all of that in the
mathematical models we develop.

 What else could the tools be used for in future cities?



 We aim to focus on crime and policing for the first two years of the grant, but
after that we could expand the models' use to other areas of the city.



 For example, we have been approached by a leisure chain that has essentially
the same problem as the police force: when do we need more staff and where? With
powerful enough models, this could be predicted on an hourly basis.



 Models could also be used to assess the local economic impact of new
developments in a city, for example Imperial's new White City campus and its
associated infrastructure. We could ask questions about what should go alongside
- if a restaurant chain was thinking about opening up an outlet there for
example, what size should it be and where should they put it?



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com





LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               7 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                              European Union News

                            March 23, 2017 Thursday

Predictive policing research gets a boost from \xA33m grant

LENGTH: 821 words

DATELINE: New York



 London: Imperial College London, United Kingdom has issued the following news
release:



 Predictive policing involves using maths and statistics to predict times and
places that serious crimes will occur based on historical crime data in a given
area, allowing police to efficiently allocate resources.



 "With more powerful models we can start to predict not just where, but when,
and what type of crime is likely to occur."



 - Professor Girolami



 A trial in Los Angeles was so successful at predicting and preventing crime
that UK authorities are investigating its use. Professor Mark Girolami, from the
Department of Mathematics at Imperial, is leading a consortium, called
Inference, Computation and Numerics for Insights into Cities (ICONIC), that
brings together researchers and policing partners. ICONIC has just been given a
£3m grant from the EPSRC.



 Hayley Dunning spoke to Professor Girolami about improving predictive policing
and how the maths used could translate to other aspects of city life in the
future.

 How has predictive policing been used so far and how can it be improved?



 Predictive policing has been used in California to identify crime hotspots
where serious crime is more likely to occur. For example, there's the 'broken
window effect', where areas of the city that are not looked after are more
attractive for certain crimes.



 These models are based on crime data and seem to work well, but we can make
improvements to provide greater levels of statistical validity of model-based
predictions. With more powerful models we can start to predict not just where,
but when, and what type of crime is likely to occur.



 We also need to quantify the amount of uncertainty in any of these predictions
so that police and policymakers can take these into account when deciding
whether to allocate resources based on them. Where the uncertainty is high, they
might want to rely more on their previous experience and knowledge of the
situation.

 Who are you working with on this project?



 We're partnering with the Universities of Oxford, Manchester and Strathclyde,
along with the Met, West Midlands, Scotland and New York police forces. We also
have on board software companies and the Home Office, who are very interested in
issues related to crime and security.



 Once we have some software to trial, we hope to deploy prototypes. This is why
we have a range of collaborating police forces to cover the UK.



 These police forces came to us. The police forces across the country are
looking at efficiencies in operations, so this work is very important. It's a
great opportunity to do some fantastic maths, but also to roll it out and have
impact on UK policing.

 It sounds like a great tool, but are there potential pitfalls to predictive
policing?



 There are certainly ethical issues to take into account. For example, some
police forces would like to be able to predict who might become a serial
offender, and make an intervention at an early stage to change the path
followed. The ethical issues are really huge there - should we even be thinking
about such interventions?



 The Alan Turing Institute have established a data ethics group, so we've set up
an initiative with them and West Midlands police to actually look at these
particular issues.



 There are also cultural differences, for example between the US and the UK,
that need to be taken into account when predicting crime. We can't just be
mathematicians working on theorems and proofs. We've brought in psychologists
and social scientists specifically so that we understand what psychological
processes are at play. What we're hoping to do is have that inform the models
that we build.



 I guess if we were working in some totalitarian state we wouldn't be worried
about the ethics of using data to profile people as to whether they were going
to be serial criminals or not - thankfully we don't and therefore this is a much
more constrained issue, and we really need to embed all of that in the
mathematical models we develop.

 What else could the tools be used for in future cities?



 We aim to focus on crime and policing for the first two years of the grant, but
after that we could expand the models' use to other areas of the city.



 For example, we have been approached by a leisure chain that has essentially
the same problem as the police force: when do we need more staff and where? With
powerful enough models, this could be predicted on an hourly basis.



 Models could also be used to assess the local economic impact of new
developments in a city, for example Imperial's new White City campus and its
associated infrastructure. We could ask questions about what should go alongside
- if a restaurant chain was thinking about opening up an outlet there for
example, what size should it be and where should they put it?



 In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please
contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com





LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               8 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 9, 2017 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

CITY & STATE;
BECK: CRIME IN L.A. LEVELS OFF;
LAPD chief calls 2017's midyear numbers a sign that police are making progress.

BYLINE: Kate Mather

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 466 words


Overall crime in Los Angeles has nearly leveled off at the midyear mark, Police
Chief Charlie Beck said Thursday, calling 2017's numbers a sign that police are
making progress against the city's stubborn uptick in crime.

As of July 1, overall crime was up less than 1% when compared with the first six
months of 2016 -- notably lower than the 6.6% increase the LAPD reported halfway
through 2016 and the 12.7% jump the year before.

Beck announced the figures at the weekly meeting of his civilian bosses on the
Police Commission. He later credited the progress to a variety of factors:
shifting department resources to target violent crime, improving predictive
policing to help stem property crime, adapting to changes in legislation and a
"relentless focus" on crime from LAPD brass.

Beck also said he hoped that by the end of the year, the city would see crime
drop. If overall crime ultimately falls this year, it will mark the first such
decrease since 2014.

"I am cautiously optimistic," Beck said. "But we'll see."

The most significant change this year has been in violent crime, which Beck said
has risen about 1%. In both 2016 and 2015, the LAPD reported double-digit
increases in violent crime at the midyear mark.

Still, homicides increased about 2% in the first six months of this year, Beck
said, which he attributed in part to a 2.4% jump in gang-related killings. The
number of gunshot victims across the city rose by roughly 4%. Aggravated
assaults, he added, were "about even."

Beck said the department's efforts to target violent crime -- which largely have
hinged on shifting Metropolitan Division officers to neighborhoods hit hardest
by violence -- "stabilized us."

Faced with the city's first major crime increase in more than a decade, Mayor
Eric Garcetti announced in 2015 that the LAPD would double the size of its elite
Metropolitan Division. The LAPD flooded crime hot spots with Metro officers,
concentrating on areas where gangs were active or where violence had recently
flared.

"Much like anything in life, it's the constant application of things that you
believe in and that work," Beck said. "Sometimes they're more effective than
others, but over time, they will always succeed."

The president of the union representing rank-and-file officers noted, however,
that violent crime was still significantly higher than it was in 2013.

The leveling off "is nothing to get too excited about," said Craig Lally of the
Los Angeles Police Protective League.

"With the hot summer months upon us, a season that typically brings more crime
with it, now is not the time for anyone to pat themselves on the back, but
rather, now is the time for Chief Beck to sharpen his pencil and create a plan
to restore safety in our neighborhoods," he said.

--

kate.mather@latimes.com

Twitter: @katemather

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved


                               9 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                        July 30, 2017 Sunday 2:59 PM GMT

Palantir: the 'special ops' tech giant that wields as much real-world power as
Google;
Peter Thiel's CIA-backed, data-mining firm honed its 'crime predicting'
techniques against insurgents in Iraq. The same methods are now being sold to
police departments. Will they inflame already tense relations between the public
and the police?

BYLINE: Jacques Peretti

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 1402 words


In Minority Report, the 2002 movie adaptation of the Philip K Dick novel, Tom
Cruise plays a police officer in the LAPD "pre-crime" unit. Using the
premonitions of sentient mutants called "pre-cogs", the police are able to
predict when someone is going to commit a crime before it happens, swooping down
from helicopters and arresting them on the street before they can do anything.
Their "crime" is that they merely thought about it.

Palantir, the CIA-backed startup, is Minority Report come true. It is
all-powerful, yet no one knows it even exists. Palantir does not have an office,
it has a "SCIF" on a back street in Palo Alto, California. SCIF stands for
"sensitive compartmentalised information facility". Palantir says its building
"must be built to be resistant to attempts to access the information within. The
network must be 'airgapped' from the public internet to prevent information
leakage."

Palantir's defence systems include advanced biometrics and walls impenetrable to
radio waves, phone signal or internet. Its data storage is blockchained: it
cannot be accessed by merely sophisticated hacking, it requires digital pass
codes held by dozens of independent parties, whose identities are themselves
protected by blockchain.

What is Palantir protecting? A palantir is a " seeing stone" in JRR Tolkien's
The Lord of the Rings ; a dark orb used by Saruman to be able to see in darkness
or blinding light. "Palantir" means "one that sees from afar", a mythical
instrument of omnipotence.

In 2004, Peter Thiel - the billionaire PayPal co-founder, Facebook investor and
and latter-day Trump ally - created Palantir alongside Nathan Gettings, Joe
Lonsdale, Stephen Cohen and Alex Karp. Their intention was to create a company
that took Big Data somewhere no one else dared to go. In 2013, Karp, Palantir's
CEO, announced that the company would not be pursuing an IPO, as going public
would make "running a company like ours very difficult". This is why.

Palantir watches everything you do and predicts what you will do next in order
to stop it. As of 2013, its client list included the CIA, the FBI, the NSA, the
Centre for Disease Control, the Marine Corps, the Air Force, Special Operations
Command, West Point and the IRS. Up to 50% of its business is with the public
sector. In-Q-Tel, the CIA's venture arm, was an early investor.

Palantir tracks everyone from potential terrorist suspects to corporate
fraudsters (Bernie Madoff was imprisoned with the help of Palantir ), child
traffickers and what they refer to as "subversives". But it is all done using
prediction.

In Iraq, the Pentagon used Palantir software to track patterns in roadside bomb
deployment and worked out garage-door openers were being used as remote
detonators by predicting it.

Palantir allowed the marines to upload DNA samples from remote locations and tap
into information gathered from years of collecting fingerprints and DNA
evidence, the results returned almost immediately.

Without Palantir, suspects would have already moved on to a different location
by the time the field agents received the results. Using the most sophisticated
data mining, Palantir can predict the future, seconds or years before it
happens. Samuel Reading - a former marine who has worked in Afghanistan for NEK
Advanced Securities Group, a US military contractor - has said : "It's the
combination of every analytical tool you could ever dream of. You will know
every single bad guy in your area."

Palantir is at the heart of the US government, but with its other arm, Palantir
Metropolis, it provides the analytical tools for hedge funds, banks and
financial services firms to outsmart each other.

Palantir does not just provide the Pentagon with a machine for global
surveillance and the data-efficient fighting of war, it runs Wall Street, too.
Palantir is exactly what it says it is: a giant digital eye like Saruman's
seeing stone in The Lord of the Rings.

On the streets of Chicago and Los Angeles, Palantir is getting closest to Philip
K Dick's vision of the future, now. In the film, a premonition of an Orwellian
thought-police state, crime rates drop to zero as the pre-crime unit
successfully imprisons thousands of individuals for merely thinking of
committing a felony.

However, when Cruise's character begins to question the morality of what he is
doing, his superiors detect a threat to the entire pre-crime programme. In order
to get rid of him, Cruise is framed for a murder by altering the data of his
thought history. In the final showdown with his boss, it is explained to Cruise
that sometimes the numbers need to lie for the greater good of society.

Minority Report is set in 2054, but Palantir is putting pre-crime into operation
now. The Los Angeles Police Department has used Palantir to predict who will
commit a crime by swooping Minority Report-style on suspects. Palantir calls its
work with the LAPD "improving situational awareness, and responding to crime in
real time".

Algorithms take in data on the location, time and date of previously committed
crimes and this data is superimposed to create hotspots on a map for police
officers to patrol. A  2013 video about "predictive policing" by the National
Science Foundation features an officer explaining how they used one of these
maps to prevent an assault "before it happened".

Military-grade surveillance technology has now migrated from Fallujah to the
suburban neighbourhoods of LA. Predictive policing is being used on illegal
drivers and petty criminals through a redeployment of techniques and algorithms
used by the US army dealing with insurgents in Iraq and with civilian casualty
patterns.

When the US is described as a "war zone" between police and young black males,
it is rarely mentioned that tactics developed by the US military in a real war
zone are actually being deployed. Is predictive policing as a counter-insurgency
tactic a contributing factor in the epidemic of police shootings of unarmed
black men in the past four years?

One could argue that sophisticated pre-crime algorithms are not necessary when
being black and male is seen as reason enough for the police to swoop. What
predictive policing has done is militarise American cities, creating a
heightened culture of suspicion and fear in areas where tensions are highest and
policing is already most difficult. Officers being led to certain neighbourhoods
solely because of an algorithm is enough to cause tension; enough to ignite a
powder keg and push a delicate policing situation over the edge.

Ana Muniz is an activist and researcher who works with the Inglewood-based Youth
Justice Coalition. "Any time that a society's military and domestic police
become more similar, the lines blur," she told LA Weekly. "The military is
supposed to defend the territory from external enemies, that's not the mission
of the police - they're not supposed to look at the population as an external
enemy."

In 2010, the LAPD announced a partnership with Motorola Solutions to monitor the
Jordan Downs public housing project with surveillance cameras. In 2013, they
announced the deployment of live CCTV cameras with facial-recognition software
in San Fernando Valley, reported to be programmed to ID suspects on a "hot
list".

Data merely becomes a new way of reinforcing old prejudices. Critics of these
analytics argue that from the moment a police officer with the pre-crime mindset
that you are a criminal steps out of their patrol car to confront you, your fate
has been sealed.

In 2013, TechCrunch obtained a leaked report on the use of Palantir by the LA
and Chicago police departments. Sgt Peter Jackson of the LAPD was quoted as
saying: "Detectives love the type of information [Palantir] provides. They can
now do things that we could not do before."

Palantir is immensely secretive. It wields as much real-world power as Google,
Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft and Apple, but unlike them, Palantir operates so far
under the radar, it is special ops.

· This is an extract from Done: The Secret Deals That Are Changing Our World by
Jacques Peretti (Hodder & Stoughton, £20), available now. To order a copy for
£17, go to                                            bookshop.theguardian.com
or call the Guardian Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online
orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               10 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                                    Trak.in

                     September 26, 2017 Tuesday 6:30 AM EST

Indian Police To Harness The Power Of Big Data - Will Predict Crime Before It
Happens!

BYLINE: Mohul Ghosh

LENGTH: 550  words


Will such usage of technology help the cops to control crime rate in India?

Image that a thief is about to break into a house, whose owners are enjoying a
vacation 5000 miles away. As the thief is about to break the lock, he hears
police sirens and approaching cops.

What happened here, the thief will wonder. Maybe he was not aware of big data
powered predictive policing, which will soon become a norm in India.

The big question here is: Will such usage of technology help the cops to control
crime rate in India?

Big Data To Predict Crime: The Indian Way

National Crime Records Bureau, which is responsible for collecting and storing
crime related data all over India, has decided to use the power of information
and data for the implementing the next generation of crime control tactics.

Welcome to Predictive Policing, which has made some great inroads in countries
like USA, and is about to break the backs of Indian criminals.

By March 2018, National Crime Records Bureau will start executing big data based
predictive policing in states of Kerala, Odisha, Maharashtra, Haryana and
Tripura and by end of 2018, whole of India will be covered.

Hyderabad-based Advanced Data Research Institute (ADRIN) is right now creating a
software, which can predict crime before it happens, using the enormous amount
of data stored with National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB).

Predictive Policing: How Will It Work?

Criminal activities are often interconnected with several common traits, and the
new software will pick up those common traits, and predict the future of crime.

For instance, in a town of 5,00,000 people, the software will observe that
maximum number of burglaries happen between 1st and 7th, which are the pay days.
Most number of crimes occur between 7 PM and 10 PM, between the bridge and the
main junction.

This information can be used to predict further crimes, in future.

Multiply it with millions of data points, and we get a comprehensive picture.

A source said, "It is basically use of big data analytics to predict
geographical areas where crime is most likely to take place, after taking into
account various factors followed by analysis"

Based on this information, police can step up surveillance, enforce more
manpower and basically stop the crime before it happens.

Factors like geographical location of the crime, population, race, lifestyle,
social issues etc. can be combined and big data, and analyzed by a AI platform
to churn out crime predictions.

The expert said, "Crime pattern identification, crime prediction and alerts,
redeployment of police resources, monitoring social media and news analysis
relating to crime is part of the project,"

As per some reports, Los Angeles Police Dept. was able to reduce thefts by 33%,
violent crimes by 21% and property related crimes by 12%, using predictive
policing. They did it after feeding their software with 13 million crimes
committed in the last 80 years.,

And Chicago Police has in fact used big data to target those criminals who were
expected to be active. And before they could act, police nabbed them.

National Crime Records Bureau has already signed a MoU with Advanced Data
Research Institute, and things would start rolling out soon.

Only one advice for criminals now: Either change your profession or change your
style and modus operandi!

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication


               Copyright 2017 Trak.in, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                               11 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                         The Daily News of Los Angeles

                            April 12, 2017 Wednesday

New top cop eyeing Valley rise in crime Deputy Chief Sherman declares his
priorities

BYLINE: Brenda Gazzar; bgazzar@scng.com @bgazzar on Twitter

SECTION: A,A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 604 words

ABSTRACT

Meet the new chief of the Valley, Deputy Chief John A. Sherman.

FULL TEXT

PANORAMA CITY >> The Los Angeles Police Department's new chief in the San
Fernando Valley knows he's got his work cut out for him.

Deputy Chief John A. Sherman, commanding officer of LAPD's Operations-Valley
Bureau, took the helm last month after predecessor Robert Green was tapped to
lead the department's new Transit Services Bureau.

With rising crime in the city and the Valley, Sherman said he's determined to
use all available tools to get the community involved to fight crime while
deploying the Valley Bureau's 2,000 police officers most effectively.

"I'm an enthusiastic kind of

guy," said Sherman, who was raised in Reseda, from his office at the
Operations-Valley Bureau in Panorama City on Tuesday. "I hope to bring that
enthusiasm and energy to the Valley and help keep our officers going in the
right direction and mobilize our community even further."

The Valley saw some 39,000 crimes last year, up from about 32,000 crimes in 2014
following years of declines, according to police data.

Part of Sherman's challenge is getting the public to lock car doors, not leave
keys or other valuables inside their vehicles, and encouraging residents to talk
to their neighbors, he said.

"Our biggest numbers are property crimes," he explained. "Our Achilles heel is
when people break into cars, steal cars or break into homes."

Violent crime is down in the Valley about 8 percent so far this year, Sherman
said, but property crimes are up about 7 percent. Today, there are more ways for
the public to become involved to safeguard their neighborhoods, including
Facebook groups as well as social networks like Nextdoor where neighbors can
exchange information and tips, he said.

The seven Los Angeles police stations in the Valley also are using predictive
policing to help put officers in areas where there is a high probability that
property crimes will occur next, said Sherman, with his new assistant commanding
officer Jorge R. Rodriguez by his side.

Sherman joined the LAPD in 1985 as a patrol officer in the Rampart Area before
moving to the Devonshire and Hollywood areas. He worked his way up to captain,
serving as the commanding officer of the Devonshire Operations Support Division
and Devonshire Patrol Division, commanding officer of the West Valley Area and
commanding officer of the Topanga Area.

First Assistant Chief MichelMoore, director of LAPD's Office of Operations,
described Sherman as a "strong and compassionate leader" with extensive
experience across ranks. Sherman recently served as the assistant to the
director in his office and was closely involved in the department's strategic
action plan for the next five years.

"John is experienced as an executive but also as a tradesman and also
understanding strategies and tactics that can prove effective" in fighting
crime, Moore said.

For Sherman, who is married to wife Tracey and has three grown children and
three grandchildren, policing is a family affair. One of Sherman's daughters is
an officer assigned to LAPD's Training Division and helps train new recruits.
His father, Glen Sherman, retired from the LAPD as a lieutenant at the
Devonshire Division in 1980 before serving as a police chief in Colorado for 14
years.

Because police today work in a "very difficult environment," Sherman said he
aims to "encourage the heart" of his officers.

"We are thrown in the midst of all sorts of challenges, in the midst of a
national discussion about immigration, national discussions about force and
national policing," he said. "We're scrutinized like we've never been before."

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                       Copyright 2017 Digital First Media
                              All Rights Reserved


                               12 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                             Government Technology

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                            July 19, 2017 Wednesday

Digital Counties Survey 2017: Winners Focus on Knowing When, How to Introduce
New Tech

BYLINE: Eyragon Eidam, Government Technology

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 21682 words


July 19--County government is increasingly leading the way when it comes to
deploying technologies that matter to everyday citizens. Where innovation and
out-of-the-box thinking used to fall to bigger, better-funded state IT agencies
and the private sector, regional governments have turned their focus to being
more adaptable and responsive to the technology needs of their constituents.

But this year, the theme among the five first-place winners is not so much about
a shiny, new technology as much as it is about knowing when and how to introduce
it. Whether investing in new tools like predictive analytics, going mobile, or
opening data to the public, these organizations are making very real differences
in the communities they serve.

This year's 15th Annual Digital Counties Survey, conducted by Center for Digital
Government*, brings attention to this work and the IT teams making it all
possible.

King County, Wash., took first place in the 1,000,000 or more-population
category for its strategic approach to regional government IT. In recent years,
county CIO Bill Kehoe said efforts to tie everything back to the big picture IT
strategy have resulted in better efficiencies and a more deliberate deployment
of necessary tools.

"That's the movement that I have seen in the last few years -- the organization
and the county have gone mainly from operational and transactional to more of a
strategic and innovative approach," he said. "We still have a way to go, but the
culture is changing in that direction."

There is also a lot at stake in the county, not only because of the expectations
put on modern digital government, but also the proximity to companies like
Amazon and Microsoft. Whenever it comes to rolling out new tech for their
internal customer departments, Kehoe said the process of engaging with county
staff and educating them is imperative to long-term success. The solution:
tailor-made classes designed to fit the individual customer needs.

"We threw a lot of new technology at our customers over the last five to seven
years, because the state of the technology in the county coming out of the
recession was very outdated, both from a basic infrastructure ... to just a lot
of outdated technology ...," he said. "What it did was really overloaded some of
our customers with new technology that they didn't necessarily know how to use."

Despite the Digital Counties recognition, the CIO said they still have their
eyes turned to the big-picture issues such as cybersecurity and the growing
demand for data services.

Within the larger King County community, meeting the call for greater digital
equity and social justice continue to percolate in the minds of leadership and
the IT team.

"The expectation is a lot higher and the accountability is a lot higher, which
is good, but I wouldn't say that IT is looked at as, 'You guys are doing great
and don't need to improve,'" he said. "I think we are always looking to improve
and really understand where our customers' pain points are and new ways to
engage with them as well."

Westchester County, N.Y., took first place in the 500,000 to 999,999-population
category for its resourceful and thoughtful use of modern IT tools. And despite
his title, county CIO John McCaffrey isn't afraid to say "no" when those tools
don't add value to the county's overall mission.

In recent years, McCaffrey has noticed the growing role Westchester's IT
department plays in the daily decision-making process. Rather than the IT team
thinking of itself as customer service-oriented, the CIO said they are now
considered strategic partners.

"They consider us at every turn, where technology will help, where technology
should lay. One of my mantras is no technology for technology sake," he said.
"Sometimes someone is trying to create a technology project around something
that shouldn't be, it's just a process."

Perhaps where IT's skillset is most valuable is in the business process
improvement arena, and in looking at the way departments are attacking their
daily workloads.

From weeding out duplicative processes to implementing a new solution, McCaffrey
said his IT staff have become the trusted voice when it comes to the best way
get services to the citizens. Occasionally, he joked, this process doesn't
require new technology at all, just a new way to use it.

"One of our things that we have been getting good recognition on is a contract
reform process, and a lot of it is around workflow and document management, and
the process itself of eliminating paperwork and eliminating procedures that were
just duplicative, but it's not new technology per se."

In looking to the future, the CIO said he would like to see the county expand
the data it uses to make informed decisions. The ever-expanding Internet of
Things and new partnerships could soon improve the ability to pinpoint vital
service deployments across all county departments, both predictively and
reactively.

Douglas County, Colo., took first place in the 250,000 to 499,999-population
category for its aggressive stance in delivering powerful and relevant tools to
the hands of their department customers. As Senior IT Manager Craig Vacura
explained, the strategy in Douglas County is not so much about pouring money
into new technology as it is about building from a good foundation.

Like their colleagues in Washington's King County, the IT team in Douglas County
serves a tech-savvy constituency, some of whom work for the region's technology
companies.

"From a county perspective, our leadership really believes in technology and is
invested in technology, not just core systems but in areas that are more
innovative and require research," he said. "One of the areas that was really
invested in recently is open data and shared systems and partnering with other
counties."

But perhaps as important as providing working tools to the personnel and
departments that need them, is the idea of breaking down the barriers between
departments and neighboring county partners. Vacura said the county's efforts to
partner with other jurisdictions have netted some great returns, especially with
regard to public safety.

Moving forward, Vacura said the county is looking to continue its work with GIS
and building what he calls a "fundamental base" for new applications, but they
also will be continuing efforts to look deeper into the capabilities of
predictive analytics.

One project he said Douglas County officials are excited about is the
possibility of using predictive analytics to better serve child welfare and
human services functions of the county. As it stands, the county is
collaborating with the state of Colorado and academic partners to determine if
and how such a tool could be utilized realistically.

Arlington County, Va., took first place in the 150,000 to 249,999-population
category for a second year in a row. Jack Belcher, CIO for the county that
shares a border with Washington, D.C., said thinking about and acting on
technology is not something that happens in a vacuum. Instead, he explained, it
happens in the communities it will ultimately affect.

"What we see technology as is really an enabler, and what we try to do in my
shop, you've got to keep the trains running, so, you've got to make sure the
servers work, the networks are up and the databases are secure and all that.
That's IT," he said. "What we are trying to do is advance the discussion about
what the future may hold for the community ..."

He calls this process shaping the county's "digital destiny." Regular input from
community groups and leadership through facilitated session allow the county's
IT team to respond with solutions that fit within the county's long-term
strategy. "What we've done is elevate that discussion," he said.

From mobility and learning to wellness and livelihood, community engagement is
central to mapping the course for Belcher's organization. Where it comes to
leadership, the buy-in and engagement, as well as a realistic perspective tech
from an investment review board, has garnered a trust-based relationship between
IT and decision-makers.

"Rather than investing in more parking lots, should we be understanding that
there is a going to be a rise in autonomous vehicles?" he said. "Maybe we need
to understand the considerations around that, and maybe we need to think about
more parks and less parking lots. We try to put it in terms of what keeps them
up at night in the community"

Albemarle County, Va., took first place in the Up to 150,000-population category
for its continued efforts to improve transparency and public access to data as
well as efforts to build a better relationship with the public it serves. Though
officials could not be reached as of press time, the county climbed from a
seventh-place rating to a first-place rating in just the last three years.

*The Center for Digital Government is part of e.Republic, Government
Technology's parent company.

WINNERS OF THE 2016 DIGITAL COUNTIES SURVEY

1,000,000 or More Population Category

1st King County, WA

King County shot to first place in 2017 from a fourth-place finish last year,
and the rationale behind its top marks are plenty. Among its recent gains in
citizen engagement is a 33 percent increase in social media followers across its
more than 200 social pages. The county credits at least part of that growth to a
micro-blog page, with 64 diverse and specialized contributors who write about
their programs, garnering shares from far beyond county limits. Its Peak
Democracy project serves as an online town hall, offering information and
visualizations on county issues, inviting (and receiving) feedback from
residents across a broad spectrum of county issues.

Collaboration efforts include participation in the Community Connectivity
Consortium, which built an optical fiber network that provides low-cost, or even
free, high-speed fiber access to public, education and government entities.
Completed in January 2017 and operated by the University of Washington, the
network plays a vital role in meeting community connectivity needs and helps
advance digital equity goals.

The workforce challenges faced by the public sector are particularly acute in
King County; officials anticipate they'll lose as much as half of the workforce
in the next five years. One tenet of their strategy as it pertains to IT is the
recent hire of an analyst focused on IT classifications and compensation,
charged with ensuring the county is equipped to attract and keep competent
staff. The county is likewise investing in shoring up its policies around data,
adding a chief data officer as well as data solution architects to its staff
roster. The new team is working to establish data warehouses and governance to
ensure the integrity of the county's data so that it's as useful as possible in
advancing strategic goals.

2nd Montgomery County, MD

Montgomery County, Md., is once again at the top of the pack, earning second
place in 2017 just as it did in 2016. Strategic IT planning is detailed and
closely tied to the priorities of the county leadership, as demonstrated by the
county executive-endorsed Technology Strategic Plan. Officials built on the
county's strong transparency and open government program this past year, adding
62 data sets from 14 departments with automated updates. Operating budget,
capital budget and spending information is now available as consumable open data
as well. The county uses "no code" solutions like Office 365, SharePoint and
Tableau to enable staff without coding skills to put open data to work to
improve operations across traditional silos.

The county continues to prioritize strong cybersecurity practices, a strategy
bolstered this year by testing of its enterprise resource planning (ERP) and
computer-aided dispatch (CAD) systems, renewal of its cyberinsurance policy,
mandatory staff and contractor training, and a tabletop exercise that blocked
financial system access for a period of five days to evaluate the county's
continuity-of-operations/disaster recovery abilities. A number of possibilities
are now being considered to put artificial intelligence (AI) technology to work
in the county, including for predictive analytics. A potential use case in
county detention facilities would use AI-backed sensors to create alerts when
movement is detected in areas where there shouldn't be any.

The 650-mile FiberNet network provides connectivity to 500 locations with
round-the-clock monitoring for the county itself, as well as public schools, a
community college, the public housing agency, and the planning and water
authorities. The county is currently surveying users and gathering performance
data to make sure connectivity lives up to advertised speeds, as well as
identify super users and the most popular Wi-Fi spots. Results will inform
future broadband strategy and investment.

2nd Oakland County, MI

Moving up three spots from its fifth-place ranking in the 2016 survey is Oakland
County, Mich., which is making headway on its cloud-first strategy -- the goal
of which is for government to be running anytime, anywhere -- and maintaining
its G2G Marketplace, a simplified way to procure contracts. The county also is
working with the state to create a chief information security officer (CISO) as
a service for jurisdictions within Michigan that cannot afford or find a
qualified CISO to use for risk assessments, IT security leadership and
suggestions for mitigating their highest risks. Cybersecurity has been a primary
focus, as have the county's social media efforts, which present a comprehensive
picture of a unified jurisdiction and IT department. And the Access Oakland Open
Data Portal displays the county's commitment to open data, which is further
evidenced by an upcoming expansion in which the GIS team will present the latest
maps and offer examples of how data can be visualized. As the county focuses on
new initiatives, the portal will provide the supporting data to the public.

On the innovation front, Oakland County has started getting its toes wet when it
comes to artificial intelligence; it's already in use for geospatial and
mapping, and predictive policing and predictive analytics. The county also has
plans for autonomous vehicle infrastructure within the next 18 months. Perhaps a
model for all local jurisdictions is Oakland County's rolling threeâ[#x20ac]year
budget, which is balanced for three to five years into the future. This process
lets county officials anticipate corrections or adjustments for future
operations -- and helped it to fund all employee health care and pensions.

3rd Wake County, NC

Though it slipped two spots from last year's survey, Wake County, N.C., is still
maintaining solid alignment of its county and IT goals and initiatives, and its
status as an open data pioneer status remains strong. The county also continues
to follow robust cybersecurity practices, including its Learning Management
System, which contains a security awareness training library that was refreshed
in 2016 to include such topics as phishing, password and email security, social
engineering, social media, mobile devices, and Internet of Things security.
Perhaps most notable is an IT department restructuring that elevated CIO Bill
Greeves to chief information and innovation officer, and created a permanent
team dedicated to innovation. With Greeves at the helm, this team will advocate
for innovation, support best practices and new service initiatives, develop
skills for innovation, help people generate ideas, create safe environments for
experimentation, and explore disruptive technologies.

The county also has developed the CREATEspace Innovation Lab, which is home to
several areas dedicated to learning and innovation. Although Wake County's newly
created interactive fiber map -- based on Internet connection data for all
municipal, education and higher-ed facilities and locations in and around the
county -- is only open to contributors in these spaces who have direct and open
access to the data, officials say it already has ignited discussions and
collaborations on cost savings, economic development, education and more. In
addition, the regional council of governments, which represents 38 towns and
counties, recently asked to expand the project into a regional resource. And
when it comes to public safety, the collaborative City-County Bureau of
Identification (CCBI) offers a fingerprint repository for 13 contributing and
accessing agencies; provides crime scene fingerprint and palm print evidence,
and mugshots and criminal arrest information for all 43 law enforcement entities
in the county; and includes a public mugshots portal and Mobile Rapid
Fingerprint Identification Module that lets Wake County and Durham County law
enforcement officials rapidly and remotely search its criminal database.

4th Alameda County, CA

Fourth-place Alameda County (also its rank in the 2016 survey), home to Oakland
and situated across the bay from San Francisco, has embraced the local tech
economy with a focus on open data. The county has had a data portal for five
years and has hosted five data-oriented hackathons called the "AC Apps
Challenge." More than 720 people in 106 teams have participated, crafting
citizen-oriented tools such as an open jobs map and an eligibility pre-screening
tool for the CalFresh nutrition program. Nearby Marin County used an Alameda
white paper to begin its own challenges.

The county has also doubled down on cybersecurity, launching a dedicated
Information Security Office and developing a five-year plan to secure systems
and data. On top of that, the county's IT department has updated its threat
detection system, joined the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center
and set up new application delivery controllers with a suite of security
functions.

To support its efforts, the county has adopted a robust strategy for hiring and
retaining talent, even as it faces stiff competition from local high-paying
private-sector tech jobs. Alameda County has paid for premium services on
LinkedIn and Dice, and it posts openings on other social media in addition to
internal advertising. A digital onboarding process lets prospective hires see
policies early and enter information easily. The county also reports impressive
results from recruiting aimed at diversifying the workforce with people of color
and women, and it has cut down unplanned attrition in its application services
office by 69 percent in five years. Once hired, the county makes a point of
getting employees involved in its innovation efforts. Alameda County maintains
an internal website where employees can share new ideas and collaborate on
projects, and has held three employee hackathons called Rethink AC to come up
with new solutions for improving the county's work and customer service.

5th Cook County, IL

Following a $154 million IT shopping spree in 2015, Cook County is beginning to
finalize a series of tech upgrades, including an integrated justice system that
automatically shares data between three related offices at different levels of
government. Other projects coming to fruition include: New enterprise resource
planning software, a GIS program allowing any employee to turn spreadsheets into
interactive maps for citizens, biometric timeclocks, a new cybersecurity
intelligence grid and cloud-based email and file sharing through Office 365.

The county's efforts to coordinate with different levels of government in
Illinois has extended to its cybersecurity program as well. The new Cook County
Cyber Threat Intelligence Grid lets municipalities inside the county securely
share intelligence online.

Another big push in the county in the past year involves using analytics to
generate return on investment in the form of dollars saved and revenue boosted.
The county is setting up an integrated tax processing system that will allow
citizens to register, file returns and pay taxes all in one place, while
simultaneously automating daily processes on the back end that will free up
workers to focus on things like compliance. IT officials expect this to create
$3 million-$6 million in extra revenue in its first year of operation, a number
that should increase over time. On the savings side, the state is saving about
$1 million annually as a result of an analysis program that brought together
various pieces of data about phone lines. Officials followed the data trail to
find unused and unnecessary lines and pull the plug on them, eliminating
needless bills.

5th Fairfax County, VA

Fairfax County may have the second highest median household income in the
country, but economic, demographic and fiscal challenges have led the county to
embrace technology to advance its government strategy. That has meant
emphasizing agility, flexibility and scalability. These principles have enhanced
the county's engagement, transparency and smart city efforts.

Take engagement. Fairfax has built multiple platforms to support social media
and citizen engagement to interconnect with the county's population of more than
1 million people. The county has had significant growth in the use of Facebook,
Twitter, YouTube and other social media platforms, while visits to the
government's website have soared to more than 19 million annually.

In the collaboration space, the county has been at the forefront of a regional
geo-spatial data exchange that involves 23 other governments. This kind of data
sharing has helped support emergency response in the nation's capital area while
reducing unnecessary duplication costs. The county has also invested heavily in
cybersecurity through its next generation security program. This includes an
artificial intelligence-based endpoint security system, as well as a new
security information and events management system. By introducing machine
learning into its security strategy, the county has built in data protection
that will keep pace with new and emerging threats.

6th Miami-Dade County, FL

This year, Miami-Dade made several key enhancements to its IT strategies. First,
the county has prioritized transparency and is beginning to see the dividends
from its investments. It now has 24 open data sets. Geo-spatial data is critical
to any county and Miami-Dade has built 183 layers and has 100 GIS data files
available for free use by visitors, businesses and residents.

The county has brought together collaboration and smart city initiatives in a
number of ways. It has created a regional smart transit plan involving federal,
state and local authorities, and is using a 3-D geographic tool to visualize the
impact of changing land use as the county enhances transit opportunities. The
county is also rolling out collaborative transportation efforts that involve
popular mobility platforms, such as Waze and Uber. The county is also pursuing
collaborative initiatives with the private sector to boost the use of predictive
analytics in the areas of law enforcement, transportation and water services.
Miami-Dade has expanded the use of cloud computing and is providing cloud
services to neighboring municipalities, as well as state and federal agencies
that operate within the county. Not only will the expanded capability generate
revenue for the county, but it enhances cybersecurity protection for these
customers as they put more data and services into the county's cloud
infrastructure.

6th San Diego County, CA

San Diego County tied Sacramento County for third place in last year's survey,
slipping slightly to join Miami-Dade County, Fla., in sixth place this year
while unleashing an impressive array of IT-centered solutions for employees and
3.2 million residents alike.

A citizen engagement tool available from county libraries, Vet Connect, lets
rural veterans meet face-to-face online with a veterans services representative
or use video conferencing to access services and do paperwork. Another new app
lets the public report issues with gas pumps, price verification and commercial
scales; field questions or complaints about smoke, smells, dust, illegal burns,
asbestos or unpermitted operations; and alert officials to waste, inoperable
vehicles and graffiti. Inside the probation agency, officers got a new app that
lets them access offender information on a smartphone; and officials are in the
process of moving toward a next-generation 911 system over the next one to two
years.

Also noted this year was the county's Functional Threading approach to
collaboration, a key piece of its business model that ensures all agencies work
together. In one instance, the Land Use and Environment Group replaced separate
permitting systems, streamlining processes across six departments. The county,
which outsourced IT 20 years ago, also simplified IT positions this year,
reclassifying county IT staff into three new classifications: IT Specialist, IT
Analyst or IT Principal. The county also entered into a new IT outsourcing
agreement in November with DXC (formerly Hewlett Packard Enterprise).

7th Orange County, FL

Orange County, Fla., home to more than 1.3 million residents and the nation's
second fastest-growing metropolitan city, Orlando, holds onto seventh place for
the second year in a row as a result of innovative engagement strategies and
smart choices around cybersecurity and staffing.

The county has been engaged in a series of outreach efforts in the year since
the June 2016 mass shooting at Orlando's Pulse nightclub. Information
Communications Technology (ICT) staff set up and maintain the  Orlando United
Assistance Center, created to serve those affected by the incident. The county
also updated its history center to reflect the tragedy's impact. Officials also
implemented Orange Code, a simplified process to govern land development. A new
smartphone app, OCFL Atlas connects citizens to their communities by identifying
new construction projects in the county.

The county's six-year-old emergency notification and information phone app OCFL
Alert was recently joined by PulsePoint Respond, an app designed to empower
those nearby to assist victims of cardiac arrest, including by directing them to
the nearest automated external defibrillator. The app is already credited with
saving the life of one person stricken in downtown Orlando.

The county's comprehensive cybersecurity team includes experts in penetration
testing, digital forensics, Payment Card Industry and Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act standards.  Orange County is combatting
ransomware with analytics and fortified log monitoring; and a dispersed network
attached to primary county networks. They have also implemented an advance
notification and response system for cybersecurity officials working with
physical security systems and their business-centered needs.

The agency also uses a unique consulting model approach to staffing, a
combination of outsourcing and insourcing which rotates employees between
different teams to for specific assignments. The approach helps enhance skill
sets, reduces burnout and gives employees more ownership over departmental
decisions.

8th Riverside County, CA

Southern California's Riverside County, the 10th largest county in the nation,
is making big strides toward connecting its nearly 2.4 million residents and
streamlining IT costs. Most notably, in an effort to overcome a staggering
digital divide, Riverside has undertaken a first-in-the-nation effort to bring 1
GB broadband to all residents and businesses within the county's 28 cities and
12 participating local tribes. The move is intended to help stimulate economic
growth, improve access to telemedicine, and expand education opportunities.
Officially called RivCoConnect, the network will be funded through a
public-private partnership, proposals for which are due Aug. 3, 2017.

Riverside is also making a strong push toward consolidating its IT, a goal it
has been working toward since 2013, focusing on interoperability, resiliency and
reducing costs. The county moved to a shared services model in 2016, and
completion of the final phase is anticipated in July 2017. One element of this
was using VMware NSX to consolidate 53 data centers into a private, county-owned
cloud, the costs of which are offset by leasing space in the data center to
external customers. Finally, in response to the coming retirement wave,
Riverside County has relaunched its internship program, and some interns have
already transitioned to permanent full-time IT positions in areas including GIS
and IT support. They are also investing in community science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) programs to encourage the next generation's interest
in technology.

9th Palm Beach County, FL

Located along Florida's eastern shoreline, Palm Beach County was selected in
this year's awards for its efforts in citizen engagement, shared services and
technology modernization to make it as effective as possible for residents. The
county launched a new website in 2016, which features responsive design and
includes social media buttons so citizens can easily get in touch with the
county through all major platforms. The site saw 2.9 million pageviews in its
first three months. Judges were especially impressed with Palm Beach's overhaul
of its communications system, an effort that began in March 2015 to replace 87
Legacy PBX systems and 10,000 telephones with a single voice over Internet
protocol (VoIP) system that will use the county's broadband fiber network,
reducing costs by decreasing reliance on leased AT&T circuits. Work on the
system is anticipated to conclude in August 2017. A number of cities have
expressed interest in contracting with the county to use the service, so Palm
Beach is working with Unify to enter into a joint venture that would create a
"Tenant Zone Solution" for interested parties. Also in the area of shared
services is the county's government cloud, which Palm Beach built through a
"do-it-yourself-method" to provide shared IT services to public agencies at the
lowest possible costs.

10th Tarrant County, TX

Tarrant County is the sixth fastest growing in the U.S., and it's estimated that
a new person moves into the county seat of Fort Worth every 24 minutes. This has
spurred the Information Technology Department (ITD) to keep pace with the
exploding population. ITD's Vision 2020 Strategic Plan outlines six goals that
make sure IT investments align with the county's business priorities and
strategic goals.

Tarrant County has made a strong effort to move toward mobile services,
including conducting website load tests before 2016's busy election season, a
move that paid off when the Tarrant County Voter Lookup website received a 2,304
percent traffic increase during that time, nearly 50 percent of which came from
mobile devices. The OpenBooks website consolidates information from existing
county webpages and allows easy access for interested constituents to
participate and comment on county decision-making.

The public health department has invested heavily in collaborative services, and
is responsible for the creation and oversight of the Texas Syndromic
Surveillance network, which receives data from health professionals over a
49-county region, which it then synthesizes and reports to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Also of note, the county has created a
Protective Orders Online Electronic Filing system, which allows complainants a
safer, faster way to file for protective orders. The new tool reduces time to
file from several days down to a few minutes, resulting in a 42 percent increase
in such orders since 2015.

500,000 -- 999,999 Population Category

1st Westchester County, NY

Westchester County received top ranking in its population category for a number
of important reasons, including the leadership of County Executive Robert P.
Astorino, who has set a governing framework that leverages information
technology to support what he calls the "Three Ps": Protect the Taxpayer,
Preserve Essential Services and Promote Economic Development. Consider how the
county has quickly leveraged mobile technology as a means to both foster better
services and provide a conduit to economic opportunities by partnering with the
local university to increase activity around mobile applications. The county was
an early adopter of mobile devices for workers and has built several customized
mobile apps that have advanced field operations.

When it comes to collaboration, Westchester has developed a robust shared
services program that has helped a growing number of municipalities, school
districts and other entities to save money, increase efficiency and reduce
duplicated services. Cybersecurity is another focal point where awareness
training is used side by side with the latest tech tools, including artificial
intelligence for pattern and advanced threat detection. At the infrastructure
level, the county has invested heavily in the Westchester Telecom Network, a
state-of-the-art fiber backbone now spanning 1,000 miles and supporting over
3,500 businesses, as well as 50 percent of the municipalities, numerous schools,
libraries, health care and public safety organizations within the county.

2nd Sonoma County, CA

Sonoma has made a concerted effort to integrate information and communication
technology (ICT) into its overall governing strategies, touching on everything
from economic development and safety to health, transportation and environmental
stewardship. A key priority is transparency of government operations, and the
county has embraced open data, which includes geo-spatial information that
supports interoperable solutions as well as other data sets available for public
consumption. The county has also set up fiscal dashboards, allowing the public
to view Sonoma's budget health, funding details and much more.

The county has a robust citizen engagement strategy that takes full advantage of
the various social media platforms to engage the public on a wide range of
activities and incidents, such as floods, fires and road closures. The county
has also deployed a customer relationship management (CRM) system that is shared
with some of the municipalities within the county. Sonoma county has also
invested significantly in its broadband infrastructure. Access Sonoma has
developed and promoted a number of broadband initiatives, including a program
that provides some residents with high-speed access at reduced costs, as well as
training and tech assistance.

3rd Ventura County, CA

Ventura County, Calif., made a significant jump in this year's survey, earning a
third-place finish in its category. Many of the county's endeavors underscore
its belief in transparent practices, including its financial transparency
website, recently upgraded with additional tools to help inform the
decision-making process for county leaders. Water management is getting a boost
from sensor networks that more specifically track performance and help shape
policy. A commitment to performance-driven government can also be seen in the
public safety area, where dashboards provide insights into recidivism trends and
offender populations. Higher caseload volumes credited to state policy changes
helped motivate the Human Services Agency's transition to digital workflows,
achieving efficiencies through abandoning traditional paper processes. In
addition, several agencies coordinate across a single case management tool to
more effectively address homelessness across departments.

Ventura County demonstrates a forward-thinking approach to mobility shared by
many leading counties who are working to reduce "app sprawl" by providing their
services through popular consumer mobile channels. For example, there are plans
to publish restaurant inspection data to Yelp, share road information with Waze
and sell county animal licenses on Amazon. An app the county developed called
iCop unifies county-wide law enforcement records management systems, equipping
officers with real-time data and cutting crime-solving time considerably.

4th Baltimore County, MD

Technology of all types plays into managing the large regional government of
Baltimore County. From how it implemented its body-worn camera program to
driving more thoughtful data-driven government, the county earned fourth place
in its population category this year. In response to a strained financial
climate, the county has turned to an internal team called the Operational
Excellence Team (OpEx) to identify smarter, data-driven ways of tackling mission
critical-processes. Most recently, the OpEx team worked to bring public safety
reporting standards in line with federal guidelines and is working to develop a
new interagency process between the county, state and federal government in
regard to public health and safety. The county is also behind a Esri-based open
data platform with more than 60 data sets in it -- this includes access to
historical imagery and preservation, and water and sewage masterplans. To better
connect first responders to the information they need to respond to critical
incidents, county IT have equipped battalion chiefs with mobile tablets capable
of meeting the demands of their job.

Applications also play a role in the overall Baltimore IT strategy, and include
tools like the Stormfighter severe weather resource app, which connects
constituents to valuable resources and enables direct citizen-to-county
communication. Where cybersecurity is concerned, the county has taken
substantial action to ensure its IT assets and staff are prepared for the
threats around them. In addition to annual mandatory training, the county
partnered with outside auditors to assess the potential weaknesses presented by
phishing attacks and other threat vectors. The Skill Base is the county's skills
assessment tool that allows officials access to employees with any number of 256
distinct skill categories to better position employees within the county
organization. In another forward-thinking effort, Baltimore County is also
working to improve responsiveness through its 16 call centers, the thought being
that a cloud-based, scalable option allows for better response times and more
flexibility during billing times or emergency situations.

5th Prince George's County, MD

Ask IT officials in Prince George's County how their work is serving the
county's goals and they can point to specific projects for every single one. The
county wants a clean environment? The Office of IT (OIT) deployed a smartphone
app for residents to report trash cleanup information. Better government
operations? OIT has set up a new customer service request system that keeps
people informed as employees work on their problems.

The county has also been making significant inroads in transparency, launching a
host of open data tools this year for budgeting, project goal tracking, food
inspections, clean water initiatives and more. Many of those involve GIS
components, and there are more projects on the way -- including an open
checkbook and operational dashboards meant to help the county improve work
performance.

Prince George's County also maintains an extensive fiber optic network for
schools and government agencies. Recently, the county signed up eight
municipalities as subscribers to its Institutional Network and put into place a
governance council that brings together input from a number of disparate
agencies.

6th San Mateo County, CA

San Mateo County made it into the rankings this year with a robust approach
centered around collaboration. The county not only maintains an open data portal
complete with performance metrics for various departments, it also searches for
multiple ways to create value from that data. The county trains and encourages
community members and organizations to use the data as they need, including for
understanding and illustrating needs and program impacts. The county has also
hosted hackathons for the datasets and its representatives have spoken at
conferences to help other local government organizations start open data
programs.

San Mateo County's collaborative approach is also manifesting itself in the form
of a "smart region" effort involving a shared fiber-optic network between the
county, municipalities, education and public safety districts in the area. A
major emphasis for the project is to enhance communication between different
entities. The county expects to complete the fiber network this year.

Then there's the governance model the county has in place for IT. An executive
council brings the county manager and leaders from every department together
with IT professionals, forming dedicated committees to discuss IT issues on
technical levels.

Lastly, the county is taking cybersecurity seriously with a multi-pronged
strategy that includes end-user training, digital outreach to employees and
regular audits of administrative privileges to go along with software and
hardware controls such as fingerprint biometrics and upgraded email security.

7th Gwinnett County, GA

Gwinnett County, Ga., the state's second most populous county with just over
900,000 residents, has many foundational elements of government technology in
place, including a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy. Gwinnett has made
above-average strides, establishing firewalls, intrusion prevention systems, and
other cloud-based security solutions, along with an internal training program.
Gwinnett's open data efforts are standard, encompassing a range of governmental
info such as meeting agendas and minutes, county budget info, and nuanced sets
like bids and RFPs. Speaking of procurement, Gwinnett is well positioned to reap
the benefits of years of planning. In 2015, the county upgraded to a purchasing
system with potential to facilitate better e-procurement, and that effort is
ongoing. Gwinnett is also well aware of a common pitfall: purchasing software
but not using every feature. To combat this, Gwinnett is emphasizing the use of
its performance management system, which it currently uses for survey forms and
manual reporting of performance data, but hopes to soon also use its data
extraction tools and a transformation utility to connect operational systems in
Gwinnett, centralizing the county's tech.

Where Gwinnett shines brightest, however, is with mobile. Gwinnett has stand-out
resident-facing apps such as an interactive property tax calculator that shows
values of services received versus property tax paid and a park locator map that
allows residents to find amenities near them. The county has effective internal
mobile tools for office and field crews, and its website is launching a fully
responsive design in 2018.

8th Chester County, PA

Last year, Chester County, Pa., made strides in open data by partnering with
OpenGov to publish vast amounts of spending info online. The county also created
ChescoCONNECT, an app for community news, events, health and human services
info, and emergency alerts. If last year was one of broad steps, this year is
one of efficiency and nuance. Chester has done hyper-specific things like
putting snapshots of local eateries' most recent inspections online so they are
accessible via mobile devices, doing so by using existing software and no new
funding. In other efficient progress, Chester is partnering with the U.S.
Geological Survey to provide residents with info about water conditions and
potential health risks at streams in the county, set to launch soon. It also
began using civil e-filing to allow litigants to initiate cases and access files
electronically. These may seem like small steps, but they add up to a
transparent county with useful open data.

Perhaps the most impressive achievements for Chester were those made in
emergency response. Chester now offers text-to-911 services, one of the first
counties in the Philadelphia area to do so. It also built PulsePoint, an app
aimed at providing life-saving assistance for victims of cardiac arrest. If
someone is having a cardiac emergency, PulsePoint contacts users nearby who are
trained in CPR, giving them the location of the emergency as well as the nearest
automated external defibrillator. These efforts are poised to continue thanks to
the recent establishment of a strategic plan to emphasize better customer
service in government.

9th DeKalb County, GA

Making their first appearance as a Digital Counties Survey winner, DeKalb
County, Ga., is working to reorient government services to accommodate a
shifting demographic, and county officials have taken steps to provide residents
with the best information technology services possible. Improvement began with
an  open and honest countywide information technology assessment (PDF) conducted
in summer 2016, which identified several opportunities for improvement.

One area that drives the county's evolution is their cloud- and mobile-first
strategy. By aiming to host applications and services in the cloud, the county
is already working with a forward-thinking industry. Cloud infrastructure also
cuts costs of onsite storage and allows for flexibility by not having to divert
employee time to maintenance of systems. It's no secret that smartphones have
changed the way residents across the country connect to the Internet. For
lower-income families, phones are often the only connection they have to the
Web, so prioritizing those users for DeKalb gets at the hardest to reach
populations. When the county redesigned its  website in November 2016, it was
optimized for mobile users using responsive design in Drupal, in conjunction
with a targeted social media campaign across all major platforms, and the
county's agendas were made publicly available through Granicus.

Perhaps the largest gains have been from DeKalb's efforts toward increasing
cybersecurity and protecting valuable data. The county introduced a suite of
cyberapplications, including intrusion detection systems and intrusion
prevention systems (IDS/IPS) to help manage threats. Analytics dashboards are
also reviewed daily to evaluate the state of the system. Intrusion attempts,
vectors and targets are monitored continuously, with alerts set up for
notifications of the need for remedial actions.

10th San Joaquin County, CA

In the summer of 2015, San Joaquin Valley, Calif., was chosen as one of Google's
kickoff sites for its Government Innovation Lab. The goal was to import some of
the company's trademark "moonshot" thinking and apply it to local government
problems. If returning to the top 10 of the Digital Counties survey is any
indication, then the workshop was a booming success. One of the major goals
addressed in the county was maintaining a well trained and committed workforce.
Sitting adjacent to Silicon Valley, the IT department suffered from tough
competition, but through a series of internships and reforms to the hiring
process, the county was able to make tremendous strides in workforce acquisition
and retention.

The other main goal for county officials was implementing a "No youth in the
Justice System" program. Focusing on the high rate of recidivism, the county
developed a program that utilized technology to create a data sharing tool that
provides timely identification and analysis of data that is related to law
enforcement dealings with youth. This tool and data will be used across
departments to guide placement, link community support services and inform the
virtual team with the goal of reducing the probability of the youth
re-offending.

250,000 -- 499,999 Population Category

1st Douglas County, CO

Colorado's Douglas County made significant digital strides over the past year,
jumping from ninth place in the 2016 survey to the top of its respective
population category this year -- and it's easy to see why. For starters, the
county's Department of Human Services is, with some assistance from the state,
taking part in an artificial intelligence pilot with New Zealand's Auckland
University of Technology. Using machine learning techniques, statewide
historical data for at-risk children is being analyzed to determine whether
at-risk indicators can be identified in the data, and is being cross-checked
with actual risk assessment results to help shape the algorithm. The county also
maintains strong open data and transparency initiatives, including making data
that was commonly requested by constituents open to the public and enabling data
visualizations directly within its open data platform. Douglas County also
established a federation agreement with the state's Open Data portal, which
means that county-level tabular open data is also available through direct
access or API access within the state's portal. And transparency work is
ongoing: In 2017, Douglas County is partnering with municipalities within its
borders to determine the next phase of growth, with the goal that engaging in
intergovernmental public data sharing and eliminating technical barriers to data
will further enhance information and service offerings to citizens -- as if
jurisdictional boundaries do not exist. Last year, NearMeDC.com, a roadwork
notification application, was still in the works. But it launched in 2016 and,
based on open data, gives citizens current community information, and they can
sign up and be notified of road construction in areas they define. And that same
information is available in Waze. Also, last year saw the launch of the Douglas
County Innovation League -- a county-wide training program to instill Lean
thinking. At the same time, IT was instructed to implement Scaled Agile
Framework, which is an expansion of ITIL Service Management, and continuous
improvement of core agile delivery practices.

2nd Dutchess County, NY

Jumping three spots from last year's survey, Dutchess County, N.Y., population
296,916, not only has its IT Strategic Plan tied to county priorities, but also
boasts solid disaster recovery initiatives, including integrated video
surveillance that was implemented at the new $4.8 million Stabilization Center
that opened this past March. Seamless integration exists between 911 Emergency
Response, the Sheriff's Office and the new the Stabilization Center, which
offers crisis counseling, among other things. Dutchess County also maintains
robust cybersecurity measures, and is extending its Web security policy to
satellite locations via security-as-a-service, which allows satellite locations
to access strong, scalable and cost-effective security services.

While the county utilizes social media and other methods to ensure solid
engagement efforts with citizens, it's worth noting that crowdsourcing
initiatives are under consideration to further engage citizens and include them
as strategic partners in improving how government works. When it comes to shared
services, Dutchess County shows significant strength, having expanded greatly
over the last year -- its GIS applications are shared with 30 municipalities,
businesses and the public, which saves $14 million annually. The Office of
Central and Information Services (OCIS) also is forward-thinking when it comes
to artificial intelligence (AI). In addition to considering AI for predictive
policing and fraud detection, the county also is debating the use of chatbots
for its internal IT Help Desk hotline to answer routine calls such as unlocking
accounts and resetting passwords. And OCIS is considering the potential of
Internet of Things, particularly as it pertains to supporting the Department of
Public Works, which already has deployed sensors in highway vehicles that
monitor and measure various performance metrics -- metrics that OCIS is thinking
about tracking and reporting to improve public transparency.

3rd Chesterfield County, VA

After a strong showing in last year's Digital Counties Survey, Chesterfield
County continues its streak with a wide range of efforts across several areas.
The county's centralized Information Systems Technology (IST) department works
diligently to ensure their strides forward in areas like open data and
cross-agency collaboration are in line with the county's mission and strategic
plan. Chesterfield indicated that cloud computing is its No. 1 priority this
year, and that shows as they've worked to migrate systems to the cloud to
streamline work and reduce redundancy among organizations. This includes
collaboration with other state and regional entities, particularly in public
safety, where this year the Police Department created a site based on Google
Groups for sharing alerts and other timely information with 39 local businesses
along a high-crime corridor across two counties, and the number of members is
expected to grow. A similar tactic was taken in IST's hiring process, which has
seen its staff vacancy rate drop 16 percent since 2013, in part due to a
cloud-based recruiting tool and a strategic recruitment plan that have helped to
streamline the recruiting process and cut down the time it takes to hire
candidates, ensuring qualified applicants are not lost due to delays. This
system took first place in Virginia's Datathon 2016: Governor's Workforce
Innovation Challenge.

More than 80 percent of the county has access to wired broadband, while more
than 90 percent have access to Wi-Fi. This is partly due to Chesterfield's
efforts to place public Wi-Fi in more than 110 locations such as parks,
libraries and historical sites around the county. Chesterfield also boasts great
interaction on social media platforms, where the county actively seeks citizen
participation and input.

4th Washoe County, NV

As major tech companies such as Apple and Tesla have moved into northern
Nevada's Washoe County, they have not only increased the population, but also
brought more tech-savvy citizens who have high expectations for IT services from
their government. Its fourth place finish this year is a credit to its progress
in transparency, citizen engagement and cybersecurity, among other initiatives.
The Technology Services department ensures that each of its annually updated
objectives maps directly to one of the county's strategic goals.

Washoe redesigned its county website in 2015 and is already planning a refresh
to keep up with user expectations. They also bolstered their frequently asked
questions page to improve the site's usefulness, and improved Board of County
Commissioners meeting videos as part of a push for transparency. They are also
launching a mobile solution so citizens who are unable to attend board meetings
can still comment and make their voices heard.

Recently, the county implemented a business intelligence solution from SAP that
integrates data from previously siloed applications, allowing county employees
to better understand and visualize data, while also making financial information
more transparent for citizens. In an effort to bolster cybersecurity, which the
county lists as its No. 1 priority, Washoe County recently completed an external
assessment of its credit card handling procedures, including its first internal
and external security penetration tests. Based on the results of the assessment,
the security team is already working to address additional cyberconcerns.

5th Clackamas County, OR

In Oregon's Clackamas County -- one of the state's more populated counties -- a
technology-centric view plays a huge role in daily living and governing. With an
unprecedented influx of people into the county and the greater Portland area,
the installation and maintenance of broadband has been an essential strategy
point for the regional government. The connectivity infrastructure has helped to
not only grow the local economy, but also has allowed for home businesses to
thrive. For the school district, the increased connectivity has resulted in
substantial savings, bringing the monthly cost down from $10,000 a month to $255
a month for Internet access. The regional government has also been focused on
bolstering its mobile capabilities with a mobile-first strategy and growing an
engaged and flexible workforce. To attract new blood into their ranks, officials
have embraced four-day workweeks and generous retirement packages. What's more,
the regional government does not require degrees and has a loose dress code
within reason. With more call than ever for 24/7 accessibility to government
resources, the county has been providing the right tools for the job. Online
services like building permitting and inspection, court citations ordinance
fees, pet health annual licensing and concealed handgun permitting are all
available to the public. When it comes to collaborating with other partners, the
county has embraced the opportunity to work with the state's Department of
Transportation to provide dark fiber to all possible county intersections. In
the near future, the county plans to move applications to the cloud.

5th Leon County, FL

In Leon County, fifth-place winner in the 250,000 to 499,999 population
category, technology plays a big part in not only how the regional government
serves its citizens, but also in how it cooperates with the local governments
around it. Joint-jurisdictional programs, like the shared data centers for the
State's Attorney's office and the Clerk's office and the Tallahassee-Leon County
GIS (TLCGIS) program, are prime examples of sharing technology to further the
public good. When it comes to using technology to keep the public safe, Leon
County's emergency website offers visitors up-to-date severe weather alerts and
safety resources; the same goes for the one-stop emergency alerts mobile app.
Open data and transparency and mobility also play heavily into the county's
overall strategy. The Your Check Book application allows citizens access to the
county spending, contracts, audits and meeting minutes, while the Citizens
Connect app enables the public to report issues, make inquiries and find
emergency information. In their efforts to streamline government operations, IT
also played into how the county handles Medicare processing. With a new case
management system, the county is able to more quickly and accurately validate
information for state reimbursements. Looking ahead, the county plans on
increasing the mobility of its workforce as well as setting the stage for
potential next-gen 911 upgrades.

6th Cumberland County, NC

Cumberland County's sixth-place win in this year's Digital Counties selection
was based largely on the jurisdiction's focus on mobile and its strategic
technology rollout. Among the local government's more innovative ideas was the
layering in of artificial intelligence to supplement the jurisdiction's
cybersecurity stance. In addition, Cumberland County is also using eDiscovery to
assist in meeting public records requests and is looking toward chatbots to
reduce the call load on larger departments, like social services and animal
control. Due to a reduction in state funding to counties and decreased property
tax revenues, officials are having to look more carefully at the technology they
implement for the future. Rather than investing in short-term projects, IT
officials are leveraging cloud whenever feasible and investing in long-term
solutions, like solid-state drives. The ever-increasing demands on the county's
technology services, both internally and externally, drove the creation of the
county's Business Intelligence Unit, which looks at enterprise solutions. Mobile
accessibility has also been a key focus of IT officials in the county. The
Freedom mobile application allows for easier viewing of 911 calls on smartphones
and iPads, and better firefighter vehicle tracking. The county's animal control
department has also added mobile capability, allowing officers to work more
efficiently from the field on a more user-friendly system. As for future
tech-heavy initiatives, Cumberland County staff are looking at next-gen 911, and
are preparing for a final state decision to allow them to move forward.

6th Dakota County, MN

Best practices, many of them with IT exposure, buoyed Minnesota's third largest
county in this year's survey. Maintaining a secure website; adopting a
mobile-first philosophy; engaging residents via social media; and using an IT
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework were all strategies that attracted
notice for this county of 414,686 residents.

The county's IT agency received funding to provide SANS security training for
all staffers; and with support and content from the countywide Information
Management Steering Committee, employees also completed privacy and security
training. County IT has also been updating its service catalog as part of an
agencywide refresh of program measurements. Its service catalog uses the ITIL
framework and is positioned to serve as the basis for a future renewal of SLAs
with county agencies. They also joined the Multi-State Information Sharing and
Analysis Center (MS-ISAC), which provides access to cyberthreat feeds and
services from the Department of Homeland Security; and implemented a Cisco
Intrusion Detection System and AristotleInsight to monitor log-on attempts and
analytics data.

Dakota County IT adopted a mobile-first philosophy and trained staffers on the
use of mobile tools and frameworks, including Visual Studio. The agency is also
upgrading applications to mobile-ready technology as IT has available time, and
updated its external-facing website to mobile-responsive design in October.
Dakota County's mobile iOS application, which aggregates locations, events and
service information, is also now available in the Apple Store. Dakota also
worked with the other six Twin Cities metro counties to remove licensing and
fees for public GIS data and published data, services and apps on the Minnesota
Geospatial Commons.

7th Loudoun County, VA

Loudoun County, the state's fastest-growing county two years ago, now serves
373,694 residents, which continues to motivate officials to modernize IT
infrastructure and improve online services.  This year, the county was
recognized in particular for connecting IT initiatives to its strategic plan,
after supervisors met in September 2016, identified increasing broadband and
cellular access and being a connected community as key policies, and adopted the
plan. To realize that vision, the Information Technology Department has released
a Request for Information for broadband in western Loudoun, and the county is
exploring a public-private partnership to improve Internet for schools, cut
construction costs and dig once.  The IT agency is also finishing an update of
virtually every major information system, and when done will begin to use
artificial intelligence to analyze financial, staff and citizen data. On the
cybersecurity front, Loudoun rolled out two-factor authentication solutions to
the appropriate employees and is undergoing a Proof of Value examination of
Advanced Threat detection systems.

Chosen by Esri as its second U.S. site for a GeoHub project modeled after the
example in Los Angeles, Loudoun County's IT department has spearheaded
development of a GeoSpatial platform featuring transportation, public safety,
community development and economic development information. Lauded for excellent
use of social media, including active posting and commenting, the county
includes a Facebook page, a Twitter feed, and a YouTube channel among its
offerings. And recognized for good collaboration with other local entities,
Loudoun County released an LC911 Situational Awareness Tool, a mobile Web app
that offers public safety agencies enterprisewide incident awareness powered by
software not commercially available.

8th Hamilton County, IN

Hamilton County, Ind., landed back on the list of top digital counties in the
country in no small part due to its commitment to "do more with less." As
municipal budgets are increasingly strained and commitments to transparency
allow for public scrutiny of wasted taxpayer money, Hamilton County is looking
at providing the most effective services by using resources as efficiently as
possible. Part of that strategy entails making sure all programs and services
offered by the county are well publicized through social media and citizen
engagement. Control for county department sites has been given to the
departments themselves, allowing for more rapid updates regarding programs and
services. Additionally Hamilton County expanded its "Notify Me" subscription
service, increasing subscription options from five to more than 40 choices,
allowing users to be more selective in what they receive from various agencies.
Residents are also given the option to receive updates via email or phone.

Understanding the rapid nature of technology advances, Hamilton County has also
implemented innovative ways of reducing costs while offering an optimal level of
service. One example is through regional cost-sharing. Hamilton and several
neighboring counties have a cross-jurisdictional agreement to cover the cost of
aerial photography for their GIS systems. Each municipality pays for the acreage
within their jurisdiction, and the final photography is shared across all
agencies. Hamilton has also outsourced several tasks rather than devoting scarce
resources to an issue and has reaped significant cost savings. According to
county officials, outsourcing tends to be less costly, faster to implement and
more robust compared to a building custom application. Leveraging vendors for
support and development allows Hamilton to provide specialized solutions with
minimal effect on IT resources.

9th Ottawa County, MI

Ottawa County, Mich., has made slow and steady progress adhering to its
strategic planning, and is realistic and honest in assessments of its progress
and challenges. Such work does not leave much room for grand innovations, but it
has allowed Ottawa to establish and pursue deliberate policies. This year the
county added a cultural intelligence component to its efforts, moving to
establish a related committee, employee training, a partnership with the
Lakeshore Ethnic Diversity Alliance and a relevant community forum. Open data
remains an ongoing concern, as it is nowadays for most jurisdictions, and Ottawa
is considering mobile applications that are capable of mapping information about
road closures, potholes, and which roads have been plowed clear of snow.
Incident mapping from the sheriff's department may also become available soon.

In terms of other new work, Ottawa has made strides in establishing more social
media accounts for governmental agencies on sites like Twitter, Facebook and
LinkedIn. Engaging the public with videos has been an area of emphasis and
success through Ottawa's YouTube channel. The county also created an online
features service center to centralize its online services and double as the home
screen for new self-service kiosks installed in several county offices.

10th Bell County, TX

Bell County, Texas, has been among the fastest-growing in the country, seeing
growth of 30.4 percent over the past decade, which outpaced both the state (20.6
percent) and the nation (9.7 percent). Amid this expansion, many of the county's
initiatives continue to focus on efficiency. One notable ongoing project is the
conversion of the courts' more-than-20-year-old legacy systems to a newer
Web-based one projected to reduce time and labor costs throughout 17 courts
while simultaneously maximizing Bell's ability to collect owed money. The
sheriff's department in Bell is working to centralize all warrants issued by
jurisdictions in the county, creating a database for prosecutors and officers to
access in the field. The county has also embraced cloud services internally,
such as Office 365, plus OneDrive for document storage and retrieval and Skype
for Business to enable chatting. Bell is focused on mobile, and within the next
year it plans to replace about 20 percent of its desktop computers with mobile
devices, while rewriting its website to make responsive design an organic
feature. Bell also has a 72-mile fiber network that spans the entire county and
connects to major cities, schools and other government agencies. It is now
evaluating the feasibility of a central data storage concept to reduce costs for
everyone.

Aside from efficiency, open government remains a focus for Bell, which added
live video and audio streaming of weekly commissioner's court meetings, plus
footage archives. Bell has also had success with cybersecurity, to date
preventing ransomware or any major intrusions with complex password rules, a
next generation firewall, website filtering to guard against phishing, and
mandatory security training for all employees.

10th Durham County, NC

Durham County's focus on data-driven government and connecting its constituents
to current and relevant data sets earned the local government a 10th place spot
in this year's Digital Counties selection. In addition to rolling out
comprehensive and publicly available financial data dashboards, the county has
partnered with Durham City to launch a cooperative portal. Internally, the
county uses data to drive the daily decision-making process and measurably
improve the services it offers to citizens. Though the region was hit hard by
the effects of the 2008 recession, leaders have focused on efficiency through
actionable data. Going mobile has also been a key action item for the county.
The jurisdiction launched a social service mobile app that allows county
employees to photograph documents and route materials to the right case manager,
and reduces travel time to the office. Officials have also launched the Durham
One Call 311 system and redesigned their website. And the county-city
collaboration, under the name IdeaLab, serves as an idea-sharing hub for public
servants to gather and exchange new and innovative ideas. Looking to the future,
officials see real-world potential for artificial intelligence (AI) when it
comes to social services and public health.

250,000 -- 499,999 Population Category

1st Douglas County, CO

Colorado's Douglas County made significant digital strides over the past year,
jumping from ninth place in the 2016 survey to the top of its respective
population category this year -- and it's easy to see why. For starters, the
county's Department of Human Services is, with some assistance from the state,
taking part in an artificial intelligence pilot with New Zealand's Auckland
University of Technology. Using machine learning techniques, statewide
historical data for at-risk children is being analyzed to determine whether
at-risk indicators can be identified in the data, and is being cross-checked
with actual risk assessment results to help shape the algorithm. The county also
maintains strong open data and transparency initiatives, including making data
that was commonly requested by constituents open to the public and enabling data
visualizations directly within its open data platform. Douglas County also
established a federation agreement with the state's Open Data portal, which
means that county-level tabular open data is also available through direct
access or API access within the state's portal. And transparency work is
ongoing: In 2017, Douglas County is partnering with municipalities within its
borders to determine the next phase of growth, with the goal that engaging in
intergovernmental public data sharing and eliminating technical barriers to data
will further enhance information and service offerings to citizens -- as if
jurisdictional boundaries do not exist. Last year, NearMeDC.com, a roadwork
notification application, was still in the works. But it launched in 2016 and,
based on open data, gives citizens current community information, and they can
sign up and be notified of road construction in areas they define. And that same
information is available in Waze. Also, last year saw the launch of the Douglas
County Innovation League -- a county-wide training program to instill Lean
thinking. At the same time, IT was instructed to implement Scaled Agile
Framework, which is an expansion of ITIL Service Management, and continuous
improvement of core agile delivery practices.

2nd Dutchess County, NY

Jumping three spots from last year's survey, Dutchess County, N.Y., population
296,916, not only has its IT Strategic Plan tied to county priorities, but also
boasts solid disaster recovery initiatives, including integrated video
surveillance that was implemented at the new $4.8 million Stabilization Center
that opened this past March. Seamless integration exists between 911 Emergency
Response, the Sheriff's Office and the new the Stabilization Center, which
offers crisis counseling, among other things. Dutchess County also maintains
robust cybersecurity measures, and is extending its Web security policy to
satellite locations via security-as-a-service, which allows satellite locations
to access strong, scalable and cost-effective security services.

While the county utilizes social media and other methods to ensure solid
engagement efforts with citizens, it's worth noting that crowdsourcing
initiatives are under consideration to further engage citizens and include them
as strategic partners in improving how government works. When it comes to shared
services, Dutchess County shows significant strength, having expanded greatly
over the last year -- its GIS applications are shared with 30 municipalities,
businesses and the public, which saves $14 million annually. The Office of
Central and Information Services (OCIS) also is forward-thinking when it comes
to artificial intelligence (AI). In addition to considering AI for predictive
policing and fraud detection, the county also is debating the use of chatbots
for its internal IT Help Desk hotline to answer routine calls such as unlocking
accounts and resetting passwords. And OCIS is considering the potential of
Internet of Things, particularly as it pertains to supporting the Department of
Public Works, which already has deployed sensors in highway vehicles that
monitor and measure various performance metrics -- metrics that OCIS is thinking
about tracking and reporting to improve public transparency.

3rd Chesterfield County, VA

After a strong showing in last year's Digital Counties Survey, Chesterfield
County continues its streak with a wide range of efforts across several areas.
The county's centralized Information Systems Technology (IST) department works
diligently to ensure their strides forward in areas like open data and
cross-agency collaboration are in line with the county's mission and strategic
plan. Chesterfield indicated that cloud computing is its No. 1 priority this
year, and that shows as they've worked to migrate systems to the cloud to
streamline work and reduce redundancy among organizations. This includes
collaboration with other state and regional entities, particularly in public
safety, where this year the Police Department created a site based on Google
Groups for sharing alerts and other timely information with 39 local businesses
along a high-crime corridor across two counties, and the number of members is
expected to grow. A similar tactic was taken in IST's hiring process, which has
seen its staff vacancy rate drop 16 percent since 2013, in part due to a
cloud-based recruiting tool and a strategic recruitment plan that have helped to
streamline the recruiting process and cut down the time it takes to hire
candidates, ensuring qualified applicants are not lost due to delays. This
system took first place in Virginia's Datathon 2016: Governor's Workforce
Innovation Challenge.

More than 80 percent of the county has access to wired broadband, while more
than 90 percent have access to Wi-Fi. This is partly due to Chesterfield's
efforts to place public Wi-Fi in more than 110 locations such as parks,
libraries and historical sites around the county. Chesterfield also boasts great
interaction on social media platforms, where the county actively seeks citizen
participation and input.

4th Washoe County, NV

As major tech companies such as Apple and Tesla have moved into northern
Nevada's Washoe County, they have not only increased the population, but also
brought more tech-savvy citizens who have high expectations for IT services from
their government. Its fourth place finish this year is a credit to its progress
in transparency, citizen engagement and cybersecurity, among other initiatives.
The Technology Services department ensures that each of its annually updated
objectives maps directly to one of the county's strategic goals.

Washoe redesigned its county website in 2015 and is already planning a refresh
to keep up with user expectations. They also bolstered their frequently asked
questions page to improve the site's usefulness, and improved Board of County
Commissioners meeting videos as part of a push for transparency. They are also
launching a mobile solution so citizens who are unable to attend board meetings
can still comment and make their voices heard.

Recently, the county implemented a business intelligence solution from SAP that
integrates data from previously siloed applications, allowing county employees
to better understand and visualize data, while also making financial information
more transparent for citizens. In an effort to bolster cybersecurity, which the
county lists as its No. 1 priority, Washoe County recently completed an external
assessment of its credit card handling procedures, including its first internal
and external security penetration tests. Based on the results of the assessment,
the security team is already working to address additional cyberconcerns.

5th Clackamas County, OR

In Oregon's Clackamas County -- one of the state's more populated counties -- a
technology-centric view plays a huge role in daily living and governing. With an
unprecedented influx of people into the county and the greater Portland area,
the installation and maintenance of broadband has been an essential strategy
point for the regional government. The connectivity infrastructure has helped to
not only grow the local economy, but also has allowed for home businesses to
thrive. For the school district, the increased connectivity has resulted in
substantial savings, bringing the monthly cost down from $10,000 a month to $255
a month for Internet access. The regional government has also been focused on
bolstering its mobile capabilities with a mobile-first strategy and growing an
engaged and flexible workforce. To attract new blood into their ranks, officials
have embraced four-day workweeks and generous retirement packages. What's more,
the regional government does not require degrees and has a loose dress code
within reason. With more call than ever for 24/7 accessibility to government
resources, the county has been providing the right tools for the job. Online
services like building permitting and inspection, court citations ordinance
fees, pet health annual licensing and concealed handgun permitting are all
available to the public. When it comes to collaborating with other partners, the
county has embraced the opportunity to work with the state's Department of
Transportation to provide dark fiber to all possible county intersections. In
the near future, the county plans to move applications to the cloud.

5th Leon County, FL

In Leon County, fifth-place winner in the 250,000 to 499,999 population
category, technology plays a big part in not only how the regional government
serves its citizens, but also in how it cooperates with the local governments
around it. Joint-jurisdictional programs, like the shared data centers for the
State's Attorney's office and the Clerk's office and the Tallahassee-Leon County
GIS (TLCGIS) program, are prime examples of sharing technology to further the
public good. When it comes to using technology to keep the public safe, Leon
County's emergency website offers visitors up-to-date severe weather alerts and
safety resources; the same goes for the one-stop emergency alerts mobile app.
Open data and transparency and mobility also play heavily into the county's
overall strategy. The Your Check Book application allows citizens access to the
county spending, contracts, audits and meeting minutes, while the Citizens
Connect app enables the public to report issues, make inquiries and find
emergency information. In their efforts to streamline government operations, IT
also played into how the county handles Medicare processing. With a new case
management system, the county is able to more quickly and accurately validate
information for state reimbursements. Looking ahead, the county plans on
increasing the mobility of its workforce as well as setting the stage for
potential next-gen 911 upgrades.

6th Cumberland County, NC

Cumberland County's sixth-place win in this year's Digital Counties selection
was based largely on the jurisdiction's focus on mobile and its strategic
technology rollout. Among the local government's more innovative ideas was the
layering in of artificial intelligence to supplement the jurisdiction's
cybersecurity stance. In addition, Cumberland County is also using eDiscovery to
assist in meeting public records requests and is looking toward chatbots to
reduce the call load on larger departments, like social services and animal
control. Due to a reduction in state funding to counties and decreased property
tax revenues, officials are having to look more carefully at the technology they
implement for the future. Rather than investing in short-term projects, IT
officials are leveraging cloud whenever feasible and investing in long-term
solutions, like solid-state drives. The ever-increasing demands on the county's
technology services, both internally and externally, drove the creation of the
county's Business Intelligence Unit, which looks at enterprise solutions. Mobile
accessibility has also been a key focus of IT officials in the county. The
Freedom mobile application allows for easier viewing of 911 calls on smartphones
and iPads, and better firefighter vehicle tracking. The county's animal control
department has also added mobile capability, allowing officers to work more
efficiently from the field on a more user-friendly system. As for future
tech-heavy initiatives, Cumberland County staff are looking at next-gen 911, and
are preparing for a final state decision to allow them to move forward.

6th Dakota County, MN

Best practices, many of them with IT exposure, buoyed Minnesota's third largest
county in this year's survey. Maintaining a secure website; adopting a
mobile-first philosophy; engaging residents via social media; and using an IT
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework were all strategies that attracted
notice for this county of 414,686 residents.

The county's IT agency received funding to provide SANS security training for
all staffers; and with support and content from the countywide Information
Management Steering Committee, employees also completed privacy and security
training. County IT has also been updating its service catalog as part of an
agencywide refresh of program measurements. Its service catalog uses the ITIL
framework and is positioned to serve as the basis for a future renewal of SLAs
with county agencies. They also joined the Multi-State Information Sharing and
Analysis Center (MS-ISAC), which provides access to cyberthreat feeds and
services from the Department of Homeland Security; and implemented a Cisco
Intrusion Detection System and AristotleInsight to monitor log-on attempts and
analytics data.

Dakota County IT adopted a mobile-first philosophy and trained staffers on the
use of mobile tools and frameworks, including Visual Studio. The agency is also
upgrading applications to mobile-ready technology as IT has available time, and
updated its external-facing website to mobile-responsive design in October.
Dakota County's mobile iOS application, which aggregates locations, events and
service information, is also now available in the Apple Store. Dakota also
worked with the other six Twin Cities metro counties to remove licensing and
fees for public GIS data and published data, services and apps on the Minnesota
Geospatial Commons.

7th Loudoun County, VA

Loudoun County, the state's fastest-growing county two years ago, now serves
373,694 residents, which continues to motivate officials to modernize IT
infrastructure and improve online services.  This year, the county was
recognized in particular for connecting IT initiatives to its strategic plan,
after supervisors met in September 2016, identified increasing broadband and
cellular access and being a connected community as key policies, and adopted the
plan. To realize that vision, the Information Technology Department has released
a Request for Information for broadband in western Loudoun, and the county is
exploring public-private partnership to improve Internet for schools, cut
construction costs and dig once.  The IT agency is also finishing an update of
virtually every major information system, and when done will begin to use
artificial intelligence to analyze financial, staff and citizen data. On the
cybersecurity front, Loudon rolled out two-factor authentication solutions to
the appropriate employees and is undergoing a Proof of Value examination of
Advanced Threat detection systems.

Chosen by Esri as its second U.S. site for a GeoHub project modeled after the
example in Los Angeles, Loudoun County's IT department has spearheaded
development of a GeoSpatial platform featuring transportation, public safety,
community development and economic development information. Lauded for excellent
use of social media, including active posting and commenting, the county
includes a Facebook page, a Twitter feed, and a YouTube channel among its
offerings. And recognized for good collaboration with other local entities,
Loudoun County released an LC911 Situational Awareness Tool, a mobile web app
that offers public safety agencies enterprise-wide incident awareness powered by
software not commercially available.

8th Hamilton County, IN

Hamilton County, Ind., landed back on the list of top digital counties in the
country in no small part due to its commitment to "do more with less." As
municipal budgets are increasingly strained and commitments to transparency
allow for public scrutiny of wasted taxpayer money, Hamilton County is looking
at providing the most effective services by using resources as efficiently as
possible. Part of that strategy entails making sure all programs and services
offered by the county are well publicized through social media and citizen
engagement. Control for county department sites has been given to the
departments themselves, allowing for more rapid updates regarding programs and
services. Additionally Hamilton County expanded its "Notify Me" subscription
service, increasing subscription options from five to more than 40 choices,
allowing users to be more selective in what they receive from various agencies.
Residents are also given the option to receive updates via email or phone.

Understanding the rapid nature of technology advances, Hamilton County has also
implemented innovative ways of reducing costs while offering an optimal level of
service. One example is through regional cost-sharing. Hamilton and several
neighboring counties have a cross-jurisdictional agreement to cover the cost of
aerial photography for their GIS systems. Each municipality pays for the acreage
within their jurisdiction, and the final photography is shared across all
agencies. Hamilton has also outsourced several tasks rather than devoting scarce
resources to an issue and has reaped significant cost savings. According to
county officials, outsourcing tends to be less costly, faster to implement and
more robust compared to a building custom application. Leveraging vendors for
support and development allows Hamilton to provide specialized solutions with
minimal effect on IT resources.

9th Ottawa County, MI

Ottawa County, Mich., has made slow and steady progress adhering to its
strategic planning, and is realistic and honest in assessments of its progress
and challenges. Such work does not leave much room for grand innovations, but it
has allowed Ottawa to establish and pursue deliberate policies. This year the
county added a cultural intelligence component to its efforts, moving to
establish a related committee, employee training, a partnership with the
Lakeshore Ethnic Diversity Alliance and a relevant community forum. Open data
remains an ongoing concern, as it is nowadays for most jurisdictions, and Ottawa
is considering mobile applications that are capable of mapping information about
road closures, potholes, and which roads have been plowed clear of snow.
Incident mapping from the sheriff's department may also become available soon.

In terms of other new work, Ottawa has made strides in establishing more social
media accounts for governmental agencies on sites like Twitter, Facebook and
LinkedIn. Engaging the public with videos has been an area of emphasis and
success through Ottawa's YouTube channel. The county also created an online
features service center to centralize its online services and double as the home
screen for new self-service kiosks installed in several county offices.

10th Bell County, TX

Bell County, Texas, has been among the fastest-growing in the country, seeing
growth of 30.4 percent over the past decade, which outpaced both the state (20.6
percent) and the nation (9.7 percent). Amid this expansion, many of the county's
initiatives continue to focus on efficiency. One notable ongoing project is the
conversion of the courts' more-than-20-year-old legacy systems to a newer
Web-based one projected to reduce time and labor costs throughout 17 courts
while simultaneously maximizing Bell's ability to collect owed money. The
sheriff's department in Bell is working to centralize all warrants issued by
jurisdictions in the county, creating a database for prosecutors and officers to
access in the field. The county has also embraced cloud services internally,
such as Office 365, plus OneDrive for document storage and retrieval and Skype
for Business to enable chatting. Bell is focused on mobile, and within the next
year it plans to replace about 20 percent of its desktop computers with mobile
devices, while rewriting its website to make responsive design an organic
feature. Bell also has a 72-mile fiber network that spans the entire county and
connects to major cities, schools and other government agencies. It is now
evaluating the feasibility of a central data storage concept to reduce costs for
everyone.

Aside from efficiency, open government remains a focus for Bell, which added
live video and audio streaming of weekly commissioner's court meetings, plus
footage archives. Bell has also had success with cybersecurity, to date
preventing ransomware or any major intrusions with complex password rules, a
next generation firewall, website filtering to guard against phishing, and
mandatory security training for all employees.

10th Durham County, NC

Durham County's focus on data-driven government and connecting its constituents
to current and relevant data sets earned the local government a 10th place spot
in this year's Digital Counties selection. In addition to rolling out
comprehensive and publicly available financial data dashboards, the county has
partnered with Durham City to launch a cooperative portal. Internally, the
county uses data to drive the daily decision-making process and measurably
improve the services it offers to citizens. Though the region was hit hard by
the effects of the 2008 recession, leaders have focused on efficiency through
actionable data. Going mobile has also been a key action item for the county.
The jurisdiction launched a social service mobile app that allows county
employees to photograph documents and route materials to the right case manager,
and reduces travel time to the office. Officials have also launched the Durham
One Call 311 system and redesigned their website. And the county-city
collaboration, under the name IdeaLab, serves as an idea-sharing hub for public
servants to gather and exchange new and innovative ideas. Looking to the future,
officials see real-world potential for artificial intelligence (AI) when it
comes to social services and public health.

150,000 -- 249,999 Population Category

1st Arlington County, VA

Arlington County ranked first in its category in 2017 (its second consecutive
year with this distinction) on the strength of many forward-leaning programs
aimed at realizing the vision of county leadership in the areas of transparency
and open government. This past year, the county live-streamed all county board
meetings and other public meetings, reporting growing engagement as a result.
More than 100 data sets now populate its open data portal, which has given rise
to a three-pronged data analytics program, consisting of strategies for data
analysis, data governance and data management, all in the name of optimizing
county decision-making. The county currently employs artificial intelligence
technologies as a part of its cybersecurity program, but plans to greatly expand
its use in the coming years. For example, Permit Arlington, a new permitting
system, will use a virtual call center for those who want to do business with
the county. The tier II system will offer online chat, video conferencing and
intelligent routing in its first phase, adding voice recognition and machine
learning capabilities in phase two. The county's aggressive mobile strategy
includes allowances for distinct kinds of mobile work -- field workers,
teleworkers and remote workers -- and strives to support the productivity of all
three with appropriate devices, policies and collaboration tools.

2nd Delaware County, OH

The fastest growing county in the state of Ohio, centrally located Delaware
County earned second place in this year's survey, up from a ninth place finish
in 2016. A multi-faceted approach to cybersecurity demonstrates its importance
for the organization: New employees are hit with cybertraining, and the
workforce is continually phished and educated with best practices throughout
their tenure. A full suite of solutions and monitoring tools protects the
county's data and networks from threats like malware, DDoS attacks and
ransomware. Liability coverage for cyberthreats has grown considerably, the
county reports, and a redundant backup system puts the county in an enviable
position for disaster recovery.

Delaware County has also made significant strides in citizen engagement in the
past year, with multiple agencies on Nextdoor, active Facebook communities where
citizen surveys are administered, and effective use of Twitter for leaders like
County Sheriff Russell L. Martin. The 911 Center's incident feed posts
automatically to both Twitter and Facebook, and the  agency website lets
residents opt in to a special needs registry to equip responders with details on
any developmental, medical or physical needs present in the household in the
event of an emergency. Shared service endeavors include Internet-bandwidth
sharing, server hosting and comprehensive IT services, representing considerable
cost savings. The county is currently pursuing similar agreements with several
additional agencies within the jurisdiction's limits.

3rd Charles County, MD

Charles County, Md., continues to stand out in its population category with a
third-place finish in 2017. Central IT supports many efforts to maximize
organizational performance with close tracking of data, using key performance
indicators as well as broad use of business intelligence tools throughout the
organization. Technology initiatives stay on track with annual updates of the IT
strategic plan and biannual reviews of all tech-related internal policies.

The county offers an impressive array of mobile-friendly online services and
mobile apps for a jurisdiction of its size (population of just over 150,000),
including a jobs app, an app offering commissioner vote tracking, bus tracking
and many others. A recycling app offers schedules, guidelines, reminders and an
interactive waste sorting game. A group of staff convene regularly to strategize
on county social media use. One product of the workgroup is a social media
playbook to help guide effective engagement strategies. Also underway is
planning for a 311-like resident request system to help residents submit and
track service requests online.

Charles County has a wide variety of tools in place in the name of
cybersecurity, including an insurance policy to further guard against breaches.
Current cybersecurity training will soon be upgraded to training solutions from
Security Mentor, which will include monthly lessons and the ability to track
progress by individual employees. Also on the staffing front, the county employs
a unique approach to keeping IT jobs filled by bringing most staff on as
part-time, allowing them to pursue their education simultaneously. The county
reports that the strategy is an effective way for the county and part-time staff
to evaluate each other before they commit to a full-time hire. Further, they
cite the added benefits of low turnover, recruitment savings, retention of
institutional knowledge and additional expertise gained through the education
part-timers are able to pursue.

4th Onslow County, NC

As a coastal county in North Carolina, Onslow was in the direct path of 2016's
Hurricane Matthew. Luckily, the state's information technology team was well
prepared and well coordinated with neighbors, constantly communicating updates.
The interjurisdictional collaboration and communication made managing an event
of that magnitude possible. Onslow's Information Technology Service has made
significant steps in the last year toward increasing their Disaster Recovery
toolset, including enabling a  microwave network backup connection between its
three main locations, diversifying ISP connections through a partnership with a
local municipality and configuring the county firewall to load balance the
Internet connection. Onslow is working with regional partners to issue an RFP to
replace Reverse 911 and citizen engagement software. By adding a joint mass
notification system, Onslow anticipates cost savings of approximately 50 percent
and gains the ability to provide the service to local governments that found it
cost prohibitive to do so prior.

Another aspect of resiliency preparedness is Onslow's commitment to social media
and citizen engagement to provide residents with updated and timely information
about emergencies. Publishing as much information as possible also falls in line
with their commitment to transparency. The finance office received a Certificate
of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting Program for the county's
transparency and data accessibility. In the past year, Onslow began training
real estate agents and contractors to use online open data tools more
efficiently, released an updated GIS Web portal, unveiled online access to
permits for Planning and Environmental Services and relaunched the county
website with enhanced functionality and ready access to information.

5th Cabarrus County, NC

In order for the Information Technology Services department of Cabarrus County,
N.C., to fulfill the county's strategic goals of connecting the government to
its residents through purposeful and strategic communication, enhancing
education and improving active community participation, ITS has revamped its
homepage and the accessibility of official documents. Finding out more about how
residents use the county's site helped provide insight on which areas needed
improvement. Taking a page from 18F's Digital Analytics Program, Cabarrus built
a public analytics dashboard for all Web traffic, and made it freely available
for the public to explore. The data comes from a unified Cabarrus County Google
Analytics account and helps county employees understand how people find, access
and use county services online.

Cabarrus has also started implementing SeamlessDocs Government Relationship
Manager, a CRM system designed to help strengthen the relationship between the
county and its citizens, employees and vendors. The system includes a citizen
portal that allows the county to correspond and communicate  with citizens and
provides them with the ability to save forms and log in to check the status of
their requests. The county is also using SeamlessDocs on their intranet site for
internal communications. The new system will feature performance dashboard
displays of each department's budget measurements and provide users with a
simple visual scorecard of how well departments are meeting their goals and
objectives.

6th Oneida County, NY

A perennial member of the top digital counties, Oneida County, N.Y., shows no
signs of slowing. One focus on the minds of many has been to upgrade
cyberdefenses through remote backups and constant attack monitoring. Oneida has
designed and installed a Continuity of Operations/Disaster Recovery data center
specifically designed with data segregation that will allow other municipal
governments to securely store their data in a physical location where that
municipality could work from in the event of a server room disaster at their
primary data center. In 2016, the county decided to conduct a Cybersecurity Risk
Assessment. Recommendations were then established into the framework for a
cybersecurity program in March 2017.

In addition to improving digital cyberinfrastructure, Oneida also focused on
physical infrastructure. Oneida, in collaboration with neighboring counties,
began working with the Mohawk Valley Transportation Management Center to enable
a seamless management of the transportation network within Oneida County for the
traveling public. The project is looking to build consensus with local elected
officials on the importance of smart transportation infrastructure to increase
awareness and generate project support in the form of a project working group.
Additionally, the project is working to identify key corridors to be upgraded,
develop a GIS database of smart infrastructure, and create a road map for
implementing applicable, cost-effective solutions and strategies with tangible
benefits.

7th Doña Ana County, NM

Doña Ana County, N.M. has the distinction of being the only New Mexico county to
place in recent years. In 2017, the county earned a seventh-place finish, driven
by a commitment to transparency, its use of tech to promote regional
transportation and its work to increase efficiency with shared services.

For years, Doña Ana has embraced robust open government practices, including
online streaming video of meetings, real-time election results, public records,
building inspection statuses and more. In the past 12 months, it built a mobile
app for getting notifications from the sheriff's department and for accessing
detention center inmate info. Citizens can also provide anonymous crime tips
using the app. Doña Ana is also working on a public-facing site for tracking and
viewing public info requests, similar to RecordTrac in Oakland. Doña Ana has
also undertaken a number of shared services projects: one of the most notable is
No Throw, an app that allows citizens to easily report illegal dump sites. That
app has been such a success that the county is now expanding it throughout the
state.

8th Davidson County, NC

This marks Davidson's fifth consecutive appearance on the Digital Counties
survey, a feat driven by a strong tradition of putting tech at the forefront of
its agenda. In recent years, Davidson has often been lauded for using predictive
analytics in its performance-based budgeting system, which helps the county
maximize taxpayer money. This system evaluates programs and measures the
relationship between resources and results, helping to ensure that funds are
allocated in the most effective ways. The tool even projects capital needs,
revenue and expenditures for the next five years in order to predict proposed
tax rates. To date, it has saved the county more than $26 million, and continues
to be a bedrock of the county's tech accomplishments. Davidson has also used
tech to enhance access to services. Its inspections department, for example, is
now accepting online permits, providing results in real time and taking online
payments.

Another major focus for Davidson as of late has been social media, as a number
of its departments have become active on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and
Pinterest within the past year. Davidson County also has a shared fiber network
with the city of Lexington that benefits both agencies, and the sheriff's
department in Davidson is collaborating with a local mental health agency and a
community college to build a new app aimed at helping officers in the field who
encounter citizens with mental health challenges.

9th Jackson County, MI

Facing down an anticipated $2 million budget shortfall, Jackson County has
nonetheless managed to move forward on mobile engagement, cybersecurity,
resiliency, connectivity speed and procurement projects in the past year. The
county's cybersecurity officer and IT staff have deployed a new firewall and are
in the process of adopting international security standards. They've also
created a task force to examine backup and recovery systems.

IT staff have also boosted the speed of the county's internal connectivity
infrastructure, including a security upgrade that will allow for encryption of
data in motion. Meanwhile, they are in the early stages of procuring a
next-generation 911 system and are considering options for a predictive policing
system. On the citizen engagement front, the county has begun launching mobile
apps and is crowdsourcing images from the community to provide content for its
new website.

9th Pitt County, NC

North Carolina's Pitt County has a number of plans underway for enhancing
services and ensuring digital success going forward. In the past year Pitt
County IT workers set up a next-generation 911 system and beefed up the
functionality of the jurisdiction's food inspection tool; in the coming year it
plans on deploying a new citizen relationship management system for economic
development. The county also put up a new mobile-first hosted website with
CivicPlus that offers form completion and submission, as well as a public data
portal. Though the data portal is download-focused and fragmented, county IT
staff have plans to put up a new, GIS-heavy data portal in the next year. To
make the most of the mobile-first website, the county has given mobile devices
to several of its departments so they can perform more work in the field.

Among the data the county offers online is detailed budget documentation and
presentations, which have won it the Distinguished Budget Presentation Award
from the Government Finance Officers Association for 30 years running. Pitt
County has also made strides in cybersecurity recently, hiring a vendor to
perform an assessment, which led to security awareness training and a managed
security services contract. IT officials plan to take advantage of the contract
as a means to put more proactive security safeguards in place. In terms of
personnel, the county has made a concerted effort to rethink how it hires,
emphasizing problem-solving and analytical skills over system-specific
knowledge. For example, one new employee has a master's degree in analytics and
is using her skills to dig for correlations among food safety-related data sets.

10th Boone County, MO

Home to the University of Missouri and not far from the state's capital city,
Boone County is taking a forward-looking approach to new technologies for a
jurisdiction its size. The county's IT officials keep a dedicated GIS office,
and there they are tinkering with new approaches to their work, such as data
fusion and artificial intelligence-powered prediction. The GIS office also
functions as a self-service data portal for citizens to use. Boone County has
also made a concerted effort to respond to the boom in mobile device use,
issuing smartphones and tablets to employees and election poll workers. IT
workers are designing a new website with mobile in mind from the beginning.
Recently the county extended its Smart911 program to include a notification
system capable of sending alerts for emergencies and other events to users'
phones and emails.

Having taken on responsibility for the county's 911 center in 2015, IT staff are
looking for ways to help hook agencies that need public safety data into the
systems they need and are planning for a new computer aided dispatch system
toward that end. One big project the county will take on soon is the procurement
of a new enterprise resource planning software package. IT officials hope to set
up a new system that will make their work more efficient, offer a larger suite
of features and operate with a more user-friendly interface.

10th St. Tammany Parish, LA

St. Tammany Parish, La., ranks No. 10 in this year's survey, and it's targeting
the end of 2017 to go live with the third phase of the parish ERP project. Fully
funded and supported by parish leadership, the upgrade better positions the
organization to serve its constituency by eliminating the need to fund and
support increasingly outdated technology. It also helps provide more
transparency into county operations, allowing for easier tracking of performance
metrics. A newly redesigned home page better connects residents to available
services, such as permit inspection requests, utility bill payments, litter
reporting and live council meetings. A full-time security analyst is now on the
payroll, helping to secure IT infrastructure for the county. In the past year, a
number of cybersecurity tools have been upgraded or added, including firewalls,
malware protections and Web filtering appliances. Strides have been made in
employee training as well. Staff is now required to attend a minimum of one
cybersecurity training session each year.

Up to 150,000 Population Category

1st Albemarle County, VA

During the past three years, a focus on technological infrastructure has helped
Virginia's Albemarle County rise from seventh place in 2015 to second place last
year to the No. 1 spot among its peers. The agency, which serves 105,000
residents, continues advancing on earlier initiatives. Its Emergency
Communications Center is the latest department to publish key performance
indicators; the county website will update in July to a mobile-first design; and
Albemarle recently won a $118,000 construction grant to expand broadband
services in rural areas.

This year, judges noted its advocacy of open data and transparency, which
includes video-streaming  meetings; providing public access to county records
through LaserFiche; taking citizen input on Albemarle's first community
telecommunications plan; and creating a public portal that integrates GIS data
with community development records to offer information on real estate and
construction. Strong public engagement programs are also in evidence, as county
officials published details of Board of Supervisors' budget work sessions, as
well as community meetings and county executive presentations; and sought input
from residents on potential urban area projects. The agency continues to
strengthen systems countywide, deploying a new records management system and
computer-aided dispatch for public safety; and using data analytics to inform
law enforcement. A partnership between the county school division and the police
department lets officers use the county's secure Wi-Fi to file reports from
their vehicles.

The county conducted an extensive security audit, introduced a new Microsoft
identity and access management system and SANS Institute security training for
all employees. Its police department's IT systems also passed a federal Criminal
Justice Information Services review. And over the next 18 to 36 months,
officials plan to explore deployment of artificial intelligence and related
devices beyond their current use in GPS and mapping, to chatbots, cybersecurity,
machine learning and general pattern behavior.

2nd Nevada County, CA

Home to more than 98,000 citizens, Nevada County dropped slightly in ranking to
second place this year but continues to impress with its commitment to serve
citizens, employees, even other cities -- in the face of a decline in overall
resources brought on by the Great Recession. Its board-adopted, three-year
Enterprise Information and Communication Technology Strategic Plan aims to boost
productivity, self-service offerings to residents and overall efficiencies.

Cybersecurity continues to be a key focus, which acknowledges that its citizens
expect government service to be comparable to private-sector service. To that
end, the county added an Accela land management and permitting suite, offering
upgraded online and mobile services including permit and plan processing,
payments, inspections and status tracking. Later this year, the county's Citizen
Request System (CRM) will be replaced by an Accela CRM featuring a fully mobile
interface. Officials rewrote the popular, public-facing GIS MyNeighborhood map
app on an Esri framework and added new aerial photographs. Elsewhere, its
cloud-hosted open data portal filters and previews its GIS data.

The county's new website, planned for launch in August, will feature responsive
design and more social media, video and citizen participation; while another
crowdsourcing site, Participate Nevada County, offers residents an easy way to
suggest, vet and comment on new ideas. A new Secure Employee Portal lets
staffers reach the Employee Access Center during an emergency, while a mobile
worker initiative and a BYOD policy enhance solutions available to employees.

Having established a data center Disaster Recovery site to provide offsite
backup and recovery for county data , Nevada County offers rack space and fiber
to local state court buildings and the town of Truckee. The county has also
partnered with a second local city to assist with its overall IT needs.

3rd Allegan County, MI

Again taking one of the top spots in this year's survey, Allegan County, Mich.,
has big plans going forward. Over the next several months, IT officials we will
be working closely with the Parks and Tourism department to deploy free Wi-Fi in
several county parks. And this past spring, it began taking part in a statewide
multi-agency collaborative program to develop cybersecurity-as-a-service -- a
program that will ultimately create a shared chief information security officer
(CISO) position for agencies across the state to utilize. Allegan County is
quite familiar with collaboration: The Allegan County Governmental Network
(ACGnet), which formed in 2010, hosts eight governmental agencies on a reduced
server inventory, and its Reverse Auction Consortium is a three-county
partnership that the entities use for procurement -- and both programs serve as
models for other municipalities across the state. The county also has expanded
its mobility efforts by partnering with Kent County for collaboration on shared
equalization services. Now staff from both counties can utilize mobile
technology solutions in the field and collaborate across county lines as if
they're in the same office. Allegan also is consistently evaluating the ease and
effectiveness of its public-facing website, using analytics and trending from
various tech tools to orient the look and feel toward its customers' interests
and popular subject matter. One thing officials gleaned from the data was the
frequency with which constituents were requesting GIS layers and shapefiles, and
after releasing the county's entire GIS Data Library free to the public,
officials went further and created a fully interactive online GIS Portal where
users can create their own maps using the data.

4th Montgomery County, VA

When it comes to taking care of its IT responsibilities, Montgomery County, Va.,
population 97,244, is on top of it -- and has held strong in fourth place for
the second year in a row. A server virtualization and data storage project that
was three years in the making has now been completed, and includes full disaster
recovery capabilities that will soon take cyberdisruptions into account. All in
all, cybersecurity is a high priority for the county; officials have begun a
substantial initiative that includes implementing several artificial
intelligence-capable tools, such as vulnerability and threat assessment, and
intrusion detection and prevention. Also impressive is the county's expansion of
its OpenGov platform that will provide interactive budgeting capabilities in the
future, as well as its dedication to social media; more than 30 social media
sites are managed by individual departments, and the IT Department used LinkedIn
Recruiter to hire a systems architect from Florida and a systems engineer from
North Carolina. Perhaps most noteworthy, however, is the implementation of the
Sheriff's Office's Automatic Injury Detection (AID) system, which relies on
plastic panels slipped inside bulletproof vests that notify department command
and dispatchers of the exact location of a deputy who's been involved in a
shooting or knife attack, or has been hit by shrapnel, so they can get medical
assistance in a timely manner.

5th Napa County, CA

In a county known for its vineyards and world-class wines, government IT is
doing some serious behind-the-scenes upgrades. All in all, the IT prowess in
Napa County, population 142,456, has earned it fifth place in this year's survey
-- after having placed sixth in 2013 and not at all since. The ultimate goal for
the county's Information Technology Services (ITS) division is to ensure that
county businesses can rely solely on technology for their commercial processes
by building business continuity into their operations -- and county departments
and constituents can utilize tech to enhance practices and gain efficiencies.
And with increased reliance on technology, leaders in ITS have expanded work
around information security, including researching new tech to secure both the
county's network infrastructure and its information stored in the cloud. To
reduce risk and improve user password management practices, ITS also implemented
single sign-on for multiple user groups. This year's judges were impressed by
the county's commitment to openness, as evidenced by the GIS data it opened to
the public in 2002 and then released into the public domain under Open Data
Commons licensing in the last year. Of particular note is the county's creation
of an animated video that simplified and gave character to an otherwise bland
topic: the county budget process. Once the video was posted to Facebook the
visual "civics lesson" generated buzz. ITS also is conducting its Innovation
Days pilot program, where employees set their normal duties aside for two days
to work on developing a solution for a business process issue they've
identified. The sixâ[#x20ac]month pilot began April 1, 2017.

5th Roanoke County, VA

A largely rural county in Southwest Virginia, Roanoke made fifth place in the
Digital Counties survey for solid accomplishments in four key areas of IT.
First, Roanoke has built up its transparency initiatives that include an open
budget planning process and outreach to interact with citizens regarding
government issues. Second, the county's open data projects have borne fruit,
especially in regards to GIS. Open data layers provide valuable location
information for economic development. Roanoke is also in the process of
developing a "GeoHub" that will allow the public to explore and visualize
location data. Third, the county has a robust mobile program that includes a
number of apps for everything from parks and recreation and general government
information to the specialized, such as a mobile incident command app. Lastly,
Roanoke has embedded citizen engagement and social media into many of its
practices. The county's employee handbook now includes instructions on best
practices and governance; all GIS-related apps have a social media component;
the police use social media as well, and the county has successfully used social
media to recruit citizens to interact and engage with county officials on civic
matters.

6th York County, VA

Located in Virginia's Tidewater region and with a population just over 66,000,
York County is small but ambitious when it comes to technology. The county has
opened up its budget process by putting it online and available to the public.
It has implemented a body cam initiative for its police department, and it
continues to make enhancements to a variety of shared services, including CMS
and finance. York receives high marks for its cybersecurity policies and
practices. The county has upgraded its firewall, which includes better intrusion
detection and intrusion protection systems. Staff undergo security awareness
training regularly, and the county has even begun building an isolated IoT
network that will mitigate risk for devices such as smart vending machines.
Infrastructure upgrades include more robust Wi-Fi across the county, the
consolidation of the county's two data centers into a single operation and a
redesigned file storage security system that won an award from the Virginia
Association of Counties in 2016.

7th Skagit County, WA

Skagit County, located north of Seattle, and home to about 120,000 residents and
three tribal nations, has invested significantly in IT to support key county
initiatives. These include an online health records system for the county's jail
system and a fiber initiative to bring high-speed bandwidth to the cities and
towns in Skagit. Enhancements to the county's GIS allow it to include new tax
parcel data, especially useful due to recent property annexations by the
county's tribal nations. In terms of services, the county has invested resources
in making government more transparent. Everything from the county code to video
of council meetings is now available through the county's portal. GIS data is
also available to support county functions and for economic and land
development. The county also has a mature shared services program in place. For
example, law enforcement agencies from different jurisdictions have access to
data, including e-discovery files on the county's document management system.
Skagit also has a partnership to provide shared IT services for the tribal
nations.

8th Summit County, UT

Despite its small, rural stature, Summit County isn't neglecting the IT duties
that help overall government function. With improving transportation being one
of its primary concerns, Summit County IT has taken an active role in using
technology to meet the challenge by spinning up an online website to offer
resources to daily commuters. Continued growth in the building industry has
further complicated the transportation issue. The county has also been working
with the state's open data project to make data more accessible to the public.
In line with efforts to curb transportation woes, the county has also
investigated the use of virtual desktop interfaces, which also helped to reduce
management costs. The VoIP phones the government installed in 2014 have aided in
the ability to work more remotely. For the near term, the county is working to
build out an Esri restaurant inspection application, as well as a septic tank
inspection application. Through a partnership with the Park City Fire District,
officials are working to improve communications and response times.

9th Rowan County, NC

What Rowan County lacks in population size it makes up for in its commitment to
IT services. The county took a ninth-place win in its population category for
its effort to better the jurisdiction through technology and the partnerships it
has built with neighboring governments. One of the key example of Rowan's
rubber-meets-road undertakings the IT department's work to streamline the 911
system, not just for itself, but also for its neighboring local and regional
government counterparts. Rowan has worked with neighboring Cabarrus County to
more seamlessly transfer 911 calls and is currently working to establish a
state-mandated backup 911 system inside the Cabarrus County facility. Rowan
County's  IT and 911 Telecommunications have also partnered with Salisbury and
Rockwell Police Departments in a shared services solution. The jurisdiction has
also developed a number of useful apps for internal and public use. Apps like
the polling place finder and ADA transit apps are available to the public, while
the EMS location app allows for first responders to quickly and easily look up
location data.

When it comes to transparency, the county is working to build its MUNIS citizens
portal that will offer access to budgetary and expenditure data based on
real-time, in-house data. The county has also turned its attention to making its
online resources more mobile accessible. According to Google Analytics, the
county reports roughly 43 percent of traffic for county services come from
mobile devices. The IT shop has also reworked itself, with the cooperation of
the county's Human Resources Department, by implementing a four-person
management team that has resulted in better definition of the roles and
responsibilities and better guidance for department staff. On the innovation
front, the public library is home to a 3-D maker space, which offers public
access to a wealth of tech resources, including 3-D printing equipment. The
county has also been working with drones to capture county branding footage.

10th Coconino County, AZ

Nestled in northern Arizona, Coconino County may be small, but it's making
steady progress on the IT front. In 2016, the county formed a Website Redesign
Committee to work on updating its public-facing website, including engaging
citizens with a public survey to report on how functional they feel the current
site is and what they want to see on the site going forward.

The county has also made strides toward open data, particularly through its GIS
applications. For example, due to budget constraints in 2014, Coconino County
was having trouble maintaining its roads. One way it dealt with the maintenance
was the creation of a dedicated Web portal to give citizens updated information
about what was being done, as well as an interactive GIS application that showed
where projects were located and what traffic that might impact. The county also
launched an open GIS data portal as a public resource where citizens can view
mapping information like voting precincts and municipal boundaries.

10th Tompkins County, NY

Shared services is the name of the game in Upstate New York's Tompkins County,
with a population of just under 104,000. They point out that unlike larger
governments, small jurisdictions often do not have the resources to implement
and support big technology initiatives, and often the best solution is to pool
resources with neighboring counties. One major shared project is the Tompkins
Shared Services Electronic Records Repository (TSSERR), a public shared records
management portal from Laserfiche for which Tompkins County is the "data
custodian." Projected cost savings from the project through 2018 is $2.9
million. Tompkins County's next big initiative will be to use a $650,000 New
York State Government Efficiency Grant to expand the enterprise content
management system to neighboring Cortland County, and in turn will store their
backup records in Cortland's data center.

Eyragon Eidam is the assistant news editor for Government Technology magazine,
and covers legislation, social media and public safety. He can be reached at
eeidam@erepublic.com

Government Technology editor Noelle Knell has more than 15 years of writing and
editing experience, covering public projects, transportation, business and
technology. A California native, she has worked in both state and local
government, and is a graduate of the University of California, Davis, with
majors in political science and American history. She can be reached via email
and on Twitter.

Lauren Harrison is the managing editor for Government Technology magazine. She
has a degree in English from the University of California, Berkeley, and more
than 10 years' experience in book and magazine publishing.

Jessica Mulholland has been a writer and editor for more than 10 years. She was
previously the editor of Emergency Management magazine, and she loves that she
can incorporate her passion for photography into her work as a part of the
Government Technology editorial team. Jessica can be reached at
jmulholland@govtech.com, @jbronwen on Twitter and on Google+.

With more than 20 years of experience covering state and local government, Tod
previously was the editor of Public CIO, e.Republic's award-winning publication
for information technology executives in the public sector. He is now a senior
editor for Government Technology and a columnist at Governing magazine.

Ben Miller is the business beat staff writer for Government Technology. His
reporting experience includes breaking news, business, community features and
technical subjects. He holds a Bachelor's degree in journalism from the Reynolds
School of Journalism at the University of Nevada, Reno, and lives in Sacramento,
Calif.

Ryan McCauley is a staff writer for Government Technology magazine, and
previously served as the publication's editorial assistant. He was born and
raised in the San Francisco Bay Area and holds a bachelor's degree in political
science from the University of California, Berkeley. He currently lives in
Davis, Calif., with his girlfriend and their dog -- who dislikes most people.

Theo Douglas is a staff writer for Government Technology. His reporting
experience includes covering municipal, county and state governments, business
and breaking news. He has a Bachelor's degree in Newspaper Journalism and a
Master's in History, both from California State University, Long Beach.

Zack Quaintance is a staff writer for Government Technology. Prior to that, he
spent five years working in daily newspapers, and another five years working in
the tech sector. He lives in Northern California.

___ (c)2017 Government Technology Visit Government Technology at www.govtech.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO:
20170719-1GT-Digital-Counties-Survey-2017-Winners-Focus-on-Knowing-When-How-to-I
ntroduce-New-Tech-0719-20170719

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1GT


                                 Copyright 2017


                               13 of 27 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright (c) 2017 The Yale Law Journal Company, Inc.
                              The Yale Law Journal

                                   May, 2017

                                Yale Law Journal

                               126 Yale L.J. 2054

LENGTH: 10471 words

ARTICLE: Police Reform and the Dismantling of Legal Estrangement

NAME: MONICA C. BELL

BIO: AUTHOR. Climenko Fellow & Lecturer on Law, Harvard Law School; Ph.D.
Candidate in Sociology & Social Policy, Harvard University. I am deeply indebted
to the Johns Hopkins Poverty & Inequality Research Lab, particularly the PIs and
fellow co-PI of the Hearing Their Voices (HTV) Study--Stefanie DeLuca, Kathryn
Edin, and Philip Garboden. I gratefully acknowledge funding from the Annie E.
Casey Foundation, Grant GA-2015-X3039, and the Johns Hopkins 21st Century Cities
Initiative. I am grateful to the members of the HTV research team: Janice Bonsu,
Steven Clapp, Meshay Clark, Kaitlin Edin-Nelson, Mitchell Generette, Marika
Miles, Daveona Ransome, Larry Robinson, Trinard Sharpe, Geena St. Andrew, and
Juliana Wittman. Many thanks also to two inspiring Baltimore organizations,
Thread and the Youth Empowered Society (YES) Drop-In Center; special thanks to
Sarah Hemminger and Frank Molina of Thread and Ciera Dunlap, Michael Jefferson,
Sonia Kumar, and Lara Law of YES. For generous feedback and helpful suggestions,
I thank Amna Akbar, Regina Austin, Ralph Rchard Banks, Dorothy Brown, Jonathan
Bruno, Devon Carbado, Guy-Uriel Charles, Matthew Clair, Beth Colgan, Sharon
Dolovitch, Yaseen Eldik, Erik Encarnacion, Malcolm Feeley, Barry Friedman, Lisa
Kern Griffin, Laurence Heifer, William Hubbard, Aziz Huq, Jeremy Kessler, Issa
Kohler-Hausmann, Maximo Langer, Adriaan Lanni, Tracey Meares, Justin McCrary,
Kimani Paul-Emile, Alicia Pler-hoples, Megan Quattlebaum, Jed Shugerman, David
Alan Sklansky, Seth Stoughton, Allison Tait, Shirin Sinnar, Tom Tyler, and
Alexander Wang. I also thank Asad Asad, Amy Chua, Matthew Desmond, Michéle
Lamont, Maggie McKinley, Judith Resnik, Robert Sampson, Stacey Singleton-Hagood,
Jeannie Suk Gersen, and Bruce Western for consistent support and insight. This
work benefitted from discussions at Boston College, Boston University, Brooklyn
Law School, Columbia, Cornell, Duke, Fordham, Georgetown, New York University,
Northeastern, Seton Hall, Stanford, University of California-Berkeley,
University of California-Los Angeles, University of Chicago, University of
Connecticut, University of Georgia, University of Pennsylvania, University of
Richmond, University of South Carolina, University of Texas, William & Mary, and
Yale University, and with participants in Yale Law School's Moot Camp and The
Yale Law Journal Reading Group. I am especially grateful for generative
commentary and support from participants in the Duke University School of Law
Emerging Scholars Workshop & Culp Colloquium, and for the editorial expertise of
the staff of The Yale Law Journal, especially Peter Posada and Sarah Weiner.
Most of all, I am grateful to the young Baltimoreans who shared their stories
with us, whose lives are the reason that getting police reform right is so
important.

HIGHLIGHT: ABSTRACT. In police reform circles, many scholars and policymakers
diagnose the frayed relationship between police forces and the communities they
serve as a problem of illegitimacy, or the idea that people lack confidence in
the police and thus are unlikely to comply or cooperate with them. The core
proposal emanating from this illegitimacy diagnosis is procedural justice, a
concept that emphasizes police officers' obligation to treat people with dignity
and respect, behave in a neutral, nonbiased way, exhibit an intention to help,
and give them voice to express themselves and their needs, largely in the
context of police stops. This Essay argues that legitimacy theory offers an
incomplete diagnosis of the policing crisis, and thus de-emphasizes deeper
structural, group-centered approaches to the problem of policing. The existing
police regulatory regime encourages large swaths of American society to see
themselves as existing within the law's aegis but outside its protection. This
Essay critiques the reliance of police decision makers on a simplified version
of legitimacy and procedural justice theory. It aims to expand the predominant
understanding of police mistrust among African Americans and the poor, proposing
that legal estrangement offers a better lens through which scholars and
policymakers can understand and respond to the current problems of policing.
Legal estrangement is a theory of detachment and eventual alienation from the
law's enforcers, and it reflects the intuition among many people in poor
communities of color that the law operates to exclude them from society.
Building on the concepts of legal cynicism and anomie in sociology, the concept
of legal estrangement provides a way of understanding the deep concerns that
motivate today's police reform movement and points toward structural approaches
to reforming policing.

TEXT:
 [*2057]  INTRODUCTION

   In the concluding paragraphs of her fiery dissent in Utah v. Strieff,  n1
Justice Sotomayor invoked W.E.B. Du Bois, James Baldwin, Michelle Alexander,
Ta-Nehisi Coates, and Marie Gottschalk in concluding that the Court's decision,
which further weakened the power of the exclusionary rule to deter
unconstitutional police conduct,  n2 sent a message -- particularly to people of
color --"that you are not a citizen of a democracy but the subject of a carceral
state, just waiting to be cataloged."  n3 Justice Sotomayor laments "treating
members of our communities as second-class citizens."  n4 Yet despite the
boldness of her statements, in some ways Justice Sotomayor might not have gone
quite far enough in articulating the troubling implications of our Fourth
Amendment jurisprudence.

   Justice Sotomayor's analysis understates the problem on two fronts. First, in
addition to the jurisprudential message that poor people of color are
"subject[s] of a carceral state" or "second-class citizens," research in
sociology, criminology, political science, and other fields suggests that these
groups often see themselves as essentially stateless -- unprotected by the law
and its enforcers and marginal to the project of making American society. Even
as criminal procedure jurisprudence sets the parameters of what police may do
under the law, it simultaneously leaves large swaths of American society to see
themselves as anomic, subject only to the brute force of the state while
excluded from its protection. The message conveyed in policing jurisprudence is
not only one of oppression, but also one of profound estrangement.

   A second understatement relates to the understanding of whose safety is at
risk when the Fourth Amendment insufficiently checks the power of the police.
Justice Sotomayor uses the second-person pronoun "you" to convey to a public
audience both the universality and the personal proximity of the risk of police
[*2058]  control.  n5 Yet this literary technique, though effective, obscures
the reality that the sense of alienation in a carceral regime emanates not only
from what police might do to "you," but from what they might do to your friends,
your intimate partners, your parents, your children; to people of your race or
social class; and to people who live in the neighborhood or the city where you
live. In other words, estrangement from the American citizenry is not merely an
individual feeling to which people of color tend to succumb more readily than
white Americans do; rather, estrangement is a collective institutional venture.

   The Black Lives Matter era has catalyzed meaningful discussion about the
tense relationship between the police and many racially and economically
isolated communities, and about how policing can be reformed to avoid deaths
like those of Rekia Boyd, Michael Brown, Eric Garner, Alton Sterling, Philando
Castile, and more. However, contemporary discourse has often neglected or
obscured deeper discussion about the relationship between African Americans --
especially poor African Americans -- and the police. What is the nature of these
relationships? How can scholars and policymakers more roundly understand their
contours and potential strategies for change?

   Many scholars and policymakers have settled on a "legitimacy deficit" as the
core diagnosis of the frayed relationship between police forces and the
communities they serve. The problem, this argument goes, is that people of color
and residents of high-poverty communities do not trust the police or believe
that they treat them fairly, and that therefore these individuals are less
likely to obey officers' commands or assist with investigations.  n6 This
argument took its most prominent position in the May 2015 Final Report of the
White House Task Force on 21st Century Policing. The Report sets forth the goal
of building trust and legitimacy as both the first pillar of its proposed
approach to police reform and as "the foundational principle underlying [the
Task Force's] inquiry into the nature of relations between law enforcement and
the communities they serve."  n7 "Trust" is a broad term, but the Report and
much of the  [*2059]  policymaking energy surrounding shifts in police
governance adopt an understanding of trust that treats it as virtually
synonymous with legitimacy.  n8

   Ample empirical evidence supports the idea that African Americans, and
residents of predominantly African American neighborhoods, are more likely than
whites to view the police as illegitimate and untrustworthy, along several axes.
n9 Empirical evidence suggests that feelings of distrust manifest themselves in
a reduced likelihood among African Americans to accept law enforcement officers'
directives and cooperate with their crime-fighting efforts.  n10 According to
much of this line of scholarship, the primary tool to achieve greater obedience
to the law and law enforcement, regardless of race, is procedural justice:
police officers treating people with dignity and respect, behaving in a neutral,
nonbiased way, exhibiting an intention to help, and giving people voice to
express themselves and their needs in interactions.  n11

   Yet many reformers would likely disagree that obedience to law enforcement is
the central concern in America's current conversation on police reform. Indeed,
in many of the cases that have most catalyzed the Black Lives Matter  [*2060]
movement, the victims of police violence were not disobeying the law,  n12 were
complying with officers' demands,  n13 or were suspected of violating petty laws
that are likely unworthy of strong enforcement efforts or penalties.  n14 A
large body of scholarship on criminal justice attempts to denaturalize the
assumed  [*2061]  link between obeying the law and criminal justice contact.
n15 Scholars have shown that recent trends in criminal justice such as pervasive
stop-and-frisk, increased misdemeanor prosecution, and mass incarceration are
not primarily consequences of increases in criminal offending. Instead, these
scholars suggest that the American criminal justice system has dual purposes,
only one of which is crime response and reduction. Its other, more insidious
function is the management and control of disfavored groups such as African
Americans, Latin Americans, the poor, certain immigrant groups, and groups who
exist at the intersection of those identities.  n16 From a social control
perspective, increasing compliance and cooperation with law enforcement may well
be valuable aims, but they should not be at the root of police reform efforts.
Deploying legitimacy theory and procedural justice as a diagnosis and solution
to the current policing crisis might even imply, at some level, that the problem
of policing is better understood as a result of African American criminality
than as a badge and incident of race-and class-based subjugation.

   Reformers' emphasis on police legitimacy has caused them to focus heavily on
training of frontline officers to behave in a procedurally just manner during
2062 stops, with a goal of promoting legitimacy. The White House report, for
example, names training and education of frontline officers as Pillar Five of a
six-pillar approach, and training is mentioned as an "action item" under all of
the five other pillars.  n17 Numerous news reports, professional reports, and
articles in professional magazines tout procedural justice as the key
intervention that will resolve the problems that have catalyzed Black Lives
Matter.  n18 Police departments across the country, in wide-ranging cities such
as Chicago, Illinois; Stockton, California; and Birmingham, Alabama, have
implemented procedural justice training.  n19 The Obama Justice Department's
consent decrees with  [*2063]  troubled departments, such as Cleveland and
Ferguson, mandate departments to adopt and implement procedural justice
principles and training.  n20 As the theory is at times presented, particularly
among police officers, responding to the concerns of marginalized communities is
as simple as following "the Golden Rule."  n21

   While momentum for procedural justice training seems persistent on a local
level,  n22 the Trump Administration seems unlikely to embrace and advocate for
this sort of reform. Trump has consistently indicated that he is generally
supportive of police officers, but he has not fully articulated what support
means at a concrete level. While Candidate Trump espoused the sanctity of state
and local control over policing,  n23 President Trump took to Twitter to
threaten to send "the Feds" to Chicago to respond to shootings, which generally
fall within the jurisdiction of local police departments.  n24 Candidate Trump
endorsed aggressive, ineffective "stop-and-frisk" policies  n25 -- meaning
policies  [*2064]  that target predominantly black and brown neighborhoods in
the style declared unconstitutional in New York City,  n26 not the
stops-and-frisks based on individualized reasonable suspicion authorized in
Terry v. Ohio.  n27 Meanwhile, President Trump floated a preliminary federal
budget, drafted by the Cato Institute, that indicated the administration would
seek to eliminate funding for the Justice Department's Office of Community
Oriented Policing Services (COPS).  n28 The COPS Office distributes federal
funding to local departments to hire more police officers, which enables
departments to hire enough officers to carry out intensive approaches like
stop-and-frisk.  n29 Without COPS funding, local departments may lack the
staffing to fulfill Trump's alleged goal of ratcheting up stop-and-frisk
measures.

   Recent executive orders on criminal justice, issued just one day after the
Senate confirmed Trump's Attorney General Jeff Sessions, continue in the
ambiguous vein of supporting the police while gently alluding to ways that
impulse might conflict with responding to the concerns that yielded Black Lives
Matter. One executive order, for example, creates a "Task Force on Crime
Reduction and Public Safety" that supports "law and order" and authorizes the
task force to "propose new legislation that could be enacted to improve public
safety and reduce crime" -- language that sounds supportive of increased
criminalization and expansion of the carceral state.  n30 Another, which
purports to prevent violence against police officers, similarly proposes "new
Federal crimes, and increase[d] penalties for existing Federal crimes" against
officers.  n31 In the context of recent debates over police legitimacy and
police-community relations,  [*2065]  these orders implicitly paint the
challenges facing criminal justice as stemming solely from criminality. They
ignore the institutional failures of certain police departments and erase the
structural underpinnings of tense police-community relations, specifically
racial isolation and class marginalization.

   The appointment of Jeff Sessions as United States Attorney General suggests
that the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division will end its investigations
of local departments,  n32 as it did under Attorneys General Alberto Gonzales
and Michael Mukasey during the second George W. Bush Administration.  n33 It is
also likely that the DOJ's funding support for the National Initiative for
Building Community Trust & Justice, founded on legitimacy and procedural justice
principles, will end.  n34 Yet given the wide embrace of procedural justice on a
local level and through national policing organizations, it would not be
surprising if procedural justice remained the prevailing approach even if the
federal government steps back from actively pushing it.  n35

   Choosing a theory of the policing crisis and its solutions is critical for
advancing meaningful, effective reform. In the world of police governance and
practice, perhaps more than in other spheres, theory matters for determining
what police departments and officers do on the ground. Much of the impetus for
broken-windows policing,  n36 community policing,  n37 "hot spots" (or focused
[*2066]  deterrence)  n38 and other predictive policing,  n39 and now procedural
justice and legitimacy came from or ripened in the academy. Through a panoply of
large and small policy decisions, theory tricldes into the daily work of
frontline police officers. Thus, getting the theory right by accurately
diagnosing the policing crisis is central to the practical project of reforming
policing.

   This Essay broadens the usual lens by proposing legal estrangement as a
corrective to the prevailing legitimacy perspective on police reform. Like
Justice Sotomayor in Strieff,  n40 the legal scholars who are setting the police
reform agenda have not fully captured the nature of the distrustful relationship
between the police and poor and African American communities. The theory of
legal estrangement provides a rounder, more contextualized understanding of this
relationship that examines the more general disappointment and disillusionment
felt by many African Americans and residents of high-poverty urban communities
with respect to law enforcement.

   Nearly twenty years ago, sociologists Robert J. Sampson and Dawn Jeglum
Bartusch described "'anomie' about law" in predominantly black and poor
neighborhoods in Chicago, a phenomenon they labeled "legal cynicism."  n41 By
"anomie," Sampson and Bartusch were describing ruptures in the social bonds that
connect individuals to their community and, in particular, to the state through
law enforcement. Building from their work and from other sociology and
criminology scholarship on legal cynicism,  n42 I introduce the concept of legal
estrangement to capture both legal cynicism --the subjective "cultural
orientation" among groups "in which the law and the agents of its enforcement,
such as the police and courts, are viewed as illegitimate, unresponsive, and ill
equipped to ensure public safety"  n43 -- and the objective structural
conditions  [*2067]  (including officer behaviors and the substantive criminal
law) that give birth to this subjective orientation.

   The concept of legal estrangement has the power to reorient police reform
efforts because it clarifies the real problem of policing: at both an
interactional and structural level, current regimes can operate to effectively
banish whole communities from the body politic. The legal estrangement
perspective treats social inclusion as the ultimate end of law enforcement. This
view extends and reformulates the legitimacy perspective, which tends to present
inclusion primarily as a pathway toward deference to legal authorities.  n44 The
legal estrangement approach encourages a fuller, theoretically informed set of
interventions into police governance.

   Part I locates distrust of the police among many African Americans and in
many disadvantaged neighborhoods as a particular, poorly understood problem. To
illustrate the analytical advantages of legal estrangement over legitimacy
theory, Part II tells the story of Shawna, a young African American woman living
in Baltimore, Maryland. Part III explains how legitimacy theory and legal
estrangement theory take different approaches to understanding the current
policing crisis. It demonstrates the power of legal estrangement theory to
improve legitimacy theory and its concomitant procedural justice approach, which
has had great influence over the police reform agenda.  n45 Part IV erects a
tripartite theory of legal estrangement. It posits that three types of
socio-legal processes contribute to legal estrangement: procedural injustice,
vicarious marginalization,  [*2068]  and structural exclusion. In addition, Part
IV illustrates the lived experience of these phenomena using portraits from rich
narrative data collected from youth in Baltimore, Maryland in the wake of the
death of Freddie Gray. Part V moves from the critical and theoretical to the
prescriptive. It argues that, in order to dismantle (or at least to reduce)
legal estrangement, multiple levels of government must engage in policy reform
aimed not only at procedural injustice, but also at vicarious marginalization
and structural exclusion. These reforms have a greater likelihood of producing
social inclusion, the deepest purpose of the policing regime.

I. THE BLIGHT OF POLICE DISTRUST IN AFRICAN AMERICAN COMMUNITIES

   For as long as scholars have studied the relationship between African
Americans and criminal justice, they have documented deep distrust of the
system. In the early twentieth century, W.E.B. Du Bois was likely the first
scholar to empirically document this distrust.  n46 As part of a series of
studies of African American life, Du Bois and his collaborators collected
survey, interview, and administrative data on crime, arrest, and incarceration.
n47 They found, among other things, that white officials and black men had
greatly divergent perspectives on the possibilities of justice for African
Americans in Georgia courts.  n48 Du Bois reasoned that punishment practices
prevalent at the time, such as lynching, "spread[] among black folk the firmly
fixed idea that few accused Negroes are really guilty."  n49 He also condemned
the relative lack of legal protection for African Americans, as well as criminal
justice practices such as the leasing of convicts, that sent a message to
African Americans that the purpose of  [*2069]  the system was to make money for
the state rather than to rehabilitate supposed lawbreakers.  n50

   Du Bois's research was prescient, at least with respect to the direction of
research and scholarship on African Americans' relationship to the crime control
system over the next century. A high watermark was the 1968 Kerner Commission
Report, commissioned by the Johnson Administration in the wake of twenty-three
episodes of urban unrest during the mid- and late 1960s.  n51 The Report
concluded that, for many African Americans, the "police have come to symbolize
white power, white racism, and white repression."  n52 Like Du Bois's Georgia
study, the Report documented "tension" and "hostility" between law enforcement
and urban African Americans, blaming the "abrasive relationship" on a
combination of increased demands for protection and service and the police
practices thought necessary to provide those services.  n53 In the South and in
the Northeastern and Midwestern Rust Belt cities where many African Americans
relocated during the Second Great Migration, police forces often functioned to
maintain the expulsion of African Americans from the center of social and
political life, at times violating the law in service of racial control.  n54
Despite pervasive harsh policing that ostensibly was intended to suppress and
deter crime, African Americans felt inadequately protected.  n55

    [*2070]  The litany of evidence confirming the existence of a tense and
distrustful relationship between African Americans and law enforcement mounted
steadily over the ensuing decades. John Hagan and Celesta Albonetti, for
example, used data from a national survey conducted in the late 1970s to
conclude that, although African Americans were more likely than whites to see
all aspects of the criminal justice system as unjust, they perceived the police
as the most unjust aspect of the criminal justice system.  n56 Drawing from
nationally representative survey data from the late 1980s, Tracey Meares argued
that many African Americans experience "dual frustration" with drugs on the one
hand and with harsh courts and law enforcement on the other.  n57 More recently,
Lawrence Bobo and Victor Thompson reached similar conclusions, finding that
while sixty-eight percent of white respondents expressed at least "'some' or 'a
lot' of confidence in the police," only eighteen percent of black respondents
would say the same.  n58 Contemporary events, particularly the increased
political, social, and academic attention directed at police use of force
because of the Black Lives Matter movement, have shed new light on longstanding
tensions between African Americans and law enforcement.  n59 Newer research
embeds the problem of police distrust within a larger framework of race- and
class-based marginalization, examining a range of police practices and
neighborhood conditions.  n60

    [*2071]  Much of this research documents African American distrust or
dissatisfaction with the law and law enforcement without clearly articulating
the meaning of distrust or the precise content of dissatisfaction. This omission
could exist, in part, because the sources of distrust and dissatisfaction are
seen as relatively obvious. A large body of historical research has documented
the entanglement of police in the long-running national project of racial
control.  n61 Yet our failure to be specific about the meaning, origins, and
content of distrust has produced a worrisome incompleteness in the diagnosis of
the problem, and thus in the prognosis and program of treatment.  n62

   Trust is a multidimensional, difficult-to-define concept that scholars
operationalize using myriad approaches.  n63 Yet in the world of policing
scholarship, the leading scholar and definer of trust is Tom Tyler. Rather than
understanding trust and legitimacy as synonymous, Tyler conceptualizes trust as
part of the larger umbrella of legitimacy. Theoretically, Tyler defines
legitimacy as a person's "perceived obligation to obey" the law,  n64 or "the
belief that legal authorities are entitled to be obeyed and that the individual
ought to defer to their judgments."  n65 Different surveys and experiments
define legitimacy in distinctive ways, but the core formulation considers
people's sense of obligation to follow the law; their sense of whether the law
"operates to protect the advantaged" (which Tyler and Huo call "cynicism about
the law");  n66 their trust in legal institutions, specifically police officers
and judges; and their favorability  [*2072]  toward the police and the courts in
their city.  n67 The conceptual distinctions between all of the manifestations
of trust that appear in the large body of legitimacy scholarship can become
blurry, and it is beyond the scope of this Essay to reconcile all of these
iterations. The core insight to keep in mind is that, in the version of
legitimacy theory that policing policymakers have adopted most completely, trust
between police and communities is understood as a problem of illegitimacy: the
key concern is the degree to which people will choose to obey the law and its
enforcers.

   Much literature has shown that, regardless of how trust is measured or
conceived, African Americans, particularly those who are poor or who live in
high-poverty or predominantly African American communities, tend to have less
trust not only in police, but also in other governmental institutions, in their
neighbors, and even in their intimate partner relationships in comparison to
other racial and ethnic groups in the United States.  n68 The picture that
emerges from the full body of research on race and trust is one of profound
marginalization, a social diminishment that--while not encapsulating the
fullness of the African American experience -- indicates that poor African
Americans as a whole tend to have a social experience distinctive from those of
other ethnic and class groups in the United States. Structural disadvantage
yields a broader cultural structure of mistrust. Most discussions of African
American distrust of the police only skirt the edges of a deeper well of
estrangement between poor communities of color and the law -- and, in turn,
society.

 [*2073]  II. TWO DIAGNOSES

A. A Crisis of Legitimacy

   The most widely accepted diagnosis of the cleavage between the police and
African Americans (particularly poor African Americans) centers on legitimacy.
Scholars argue that African Americans are less likely than other groups to see
the police as legitimate authorities, meaning that as a group they are less
likely to have "a feeling of obligation to obey the law and to defer to the
decisions made by legal authorities."  n69 Although trust and legitimacy are
distinct concepts, scholars and policymakers tend to treat the ideas as
functionally equivalent for reform purposes. The core determinant of whether law
enforcement is perceived as legitimate, and thus worthy of obedience and
assistance, is whether police officers behave in a procedurally just manner.
n70 Procedural justice is believed to encapsulate several components, including
treating people with dignity and respect, voice (which can include citizen
participation and allowing individuals to express their concerns), neutrality
(freedom from bias), and conveying trustworthy motives (explaining how the
police are helping reach an important social goal).  n71 Tyler and his
colleagues were not the first to articulate a socio-legal rationale for
procedural justice,  n72 but their formulation has had the greatest influence
over the push toward procedural justice in policing.

   An overview of the genealogy of police legitimacy theory is helpful for
distinguishing it from legal estrangement. Although the research on police
legitimacy primarily draws from social psychology, the theoretical underpinnings
of the concept (like much of the scholarship on legal legitimacy across domains)
n73  [*2074]  usually derive from the work of sociologist Max Weber.  n74 From
Weber's standpoint, legitimation is a subjective process: it does not inhere in
an authority's procedures or existence, but is continuously negotiated with
subjects, talcing into account their views.  n75 Weber classified the types of
authority that legitimate orders tend to exhibit into three "ideal types"  n76:
charismatic authority, or authority based on perceived personal divinity or
exemplariness; traditional authority, based on custom and epitomized by the
King; and legal-rational authority, the form of authority found most frequently
in modern advanced society, which is based on process and consent.  n77 Weber
believed that legal-rational authority (the focus of nearly all research on
legitimacy today) is, in some ways, the preferred version of legitimation
because this legitimation strategy makes clear that, in choosing government
through transparent, rational means, human beings are exercising their autonomy
and free will.  n78 While the threat of violence from the state always lurks,
the state's authority over its citizens primarily comes from the state's
adherence to process.  n79

    [*2075]  In the legal and political realms,  n80 the purpose of legitimacy
theory is to understand how the state, from a moral perspective, justifies its
power and how, as an empirical matter, it most effectively exercises power over
its subjects.  n81 State power is the ultimate focal point of legitimacy
analysis.  n82 The question then becomes, how does the state attain power over
its subjects? Theorists such as Habermas refined the concept of legitimacy to
emphasize consent, adding a layer of deliberation and positing that legitimacy
can be built through dialogue among equal citizens.  n83 Along these lines, but
with concern about the normative implications of consent, Gramsci argued that
governments (and more precisely, capitalist governments) gained legitimacy
through ideological and cultural  [*2076]  hegemony: legitimation is a bundle of
processes that elites use to procure public buy-in to oppressive systems.  n84

   Regardless of the normative valence of consent, its emphasis in the study of
legitimacy has led social psychology research to focus largely on what makes
people voluntarily obey and help the state.  n85 This consent-based conception
of legitimacy falls in line with a focus among policymakers on how to increase
voluntary adherence to the law.  n86 The empirical work also tries to ascertain
how the circumstances under which the community sees legal authority as
legitimate might vary across groups.

   This focus on consent has produced some insights about the nature of racial
divergence in police legitimacy. Two insights have been most central. First,
across racial-ethnic groups, people tend to view police as legitimate when they
are procedurally just, and people tend to interpret fairness similarly across
eth-no-racial divides.  n87 Second, the primary reason African Americans do not
see police as legitimate is because they tend to have more personal experiences
in which police officers treat them in a procedurally unjust manner.  n88
Although little is known about the specific behaviors and practices that people
consider  [*2077]  fair or unfair,  n89 the police legitimacy literature
empirically shows that people want the same type of treatment from police
regardless of their race or class. This conclusion means that African Americans'
greater distrust of the police results not from supposed subcultural values or
"bad culture," but instead arises as the product of negative personal
experiences.

   This insight has driven legal scholarship in several directions.  n90 Most
central to the analysis of this Essay, police legitimacy scholarship encouraged
legal scholars to explore ways that the law might better facilitate procedurally
just policing and respond to procedurally unjust policing policies and
practices. Steven Schulhofer, Tom Tyler, and Aziz Huq present one of the most
fully  [*2078]  elaborated applications of legitimacy theory to policing,
applying the theory to both conventional and counterterrorism policing.  n91
They set forth three policy goals that should emanate from the procedural
justice policing model: (1) training officers to treat force as a last resort
and "to view every citizen contact as an opportunity to build legitimacy through
the tone and quality of the interaction";  n92 (2) eschewing regulation of the
police through the blunt instruments of the law (for example, the exclusionary
rule) in favor of internal department management policies designed to positively
motivate police to treat the public fairly;  n93 and (3) in the counterterrorism
realm, avoiding the impulse to authorize the use of harsh tactics such as
ethno-racial profiling and random checkpoints.  n94 Schulhofer, Tyler, and Huq's
approach is distinctively what Rachel Harmon calls "non law,"  n95 in the sense
that it explicitly rejects legal intervention into policing. Their core
suggestions are training, the substance of which is highly discretionary and
rarely encoded directly into law, and avoiding litigation-based pathways toward
systemic reform, such as the Department of Justice consent decree process. The
solutions do not involve creating, changing, or enforcing the law. This means
that, even if these approaches are effective, they largely leave intact the
legal structure that has given birth to distrust and illegitimacy.

   Meares has made several proposals to encourage departments to adopt
principles of procedural justice. Conceptually, she has advanced the notion of
"rightful policing," the idea that policing should be designed to maximize both
[*2079]  lawful conduct and community perceptions of police legitimacy.  n96
Building in part from Schulhofer, Tyler, and Huq's idea that persuading and
incentivizing police to treat people fairly will be more effective than forcing
them to do so, Meares's scholarship has embraced community policing efforts such
as Project Safe Neighborhoods in Chicago, Illinois, Project Exile in Richmond,
Virginia, and Operation Ceasefire in Boston, Massachusetts. These programs'
methods include organizing meetings with ex-offenders to build relationships and
inform them of alternative opportunities to crime, as well as holistic
problem-solving approaches, such as legitimacy-based "hot spots" policing (also
known as focused deterrence).  n97 These approaches are a sort of proactive
policing that should, according to their proponents, avoid the pitfalls of
earlier forms of broken-windows policing because they now emphasize procedural
justice in the micro-level interactions of police contact.  n98

   Scholars have proposed a variety of other interventions to build legitimacy,
as well. For example, some have proposed that law enforcement randomize police
stops and searches. In theory, randomization should allow police to engage in
hands-on crime prevention without negatively impacting the legitimacy of the
system by making specific people, particularly young African American and Latino
men, feel targeted.  n99 Other scholars have incorporated these concerns about
spatial and racial distribution of procedurally unjust policing into Fourth
Amendment arguments. They propose that courts should consider whether officers
were making an individualized determination of suspicion, as constitutionally
[*2080]  required,  n100 or rather engaging in a collective determination of
suspicion based on race and geography.  n101 Other recent work proposes using a
disparate impact framework, similar to that used in Title VII analysis, to
assess the spatial and racial impacts of stop-question-frisk.  n102

   The greatest strength of the police legitimacy approach is its deceptive
simplicity. Its two core ideas -- that people will accept unfavorable police
decisions so long as the preceding processes are perceived to be fair, and that
the police should treat all people, including African Americans and the poor,
with dignity and respect in order to be more effective at the work of crime
deterrence--are marked deviations from the prevailing wisdom about policing that
preceded legitimacy theory. For example, as noted above, the Kerner Commission
Report partly blamed African Americans' cynicism about the police on the harsh
tactics that police deemed necessary to control crime in predominantly black
inner-city neighborhoods.  n103 In one of the earliest in-depth studies of urban
police, William  [*208l]  A. Westley found that the police officers he studied
tended to view both African Americans and residents of poor neighborhoods as
requiring a fundamentall different type of policing than other groups because
those two groups would "respond only to fear and rough treatment."  n104
Officers today are not as likely to overtly express racial animus, but they
might use different language focused on class and "culture" to make a similar
point.  n105 Justifications for race-and class-differentiated policing partly
derive from a view that police tactics must vary by the type of community in
order to be effective. The procedural justice approach is a partial corrective
to that common wisdom.

   However, police legitimacy is not all-encompassing, and it is often
disturbingly oversimplified in practice. Policymakers and police department
leaders attempting to apply the theory often condense it to empirically informed
officer politeness.  n106 Most legitimacy scholars would not claim that the lack
of legitimacy is the sole problem in the relationship between law enforcement
and African American and poor communities, or that procedural justice is the
only solution needed.  n107 Yet much of the current reform conversation has
drawn heavily on legitimacy theory and the procedural justice approach as if
they are silver-bullet solutions to today's policing crisis. Reformers have done
so in part because the proposals that emanate from the procedural justice
perspective, such as improved officer training,  n108 are relatively easy for
police agencies to  [*2082]  implement, relatively inexpensive, and relatively
noncontroversial--while offering some real, on-the-ground benefits to civilians
who encounter the police.  n109

   If the solution to today's social and legal policing problems is training,
the path forward is clear. Yet some scholars have worried that without an
emphasis on the problem of collective estrangement through social and racial
control, the procedural justice solution could paradoxically teach officers more
effective ways to discriminate and violate privacy.  n110 Indeed, Fourth
Amendment jurisprudence on the voluntariness of searches foregrounds this
danger. Courts often mention the politeness or courtesy of officers when using a
totality of the circumstances analysis to decide whether a warrantless search
was voluntary, at times debating the relative importance of politeness in the
voluntariness analysis.  n111 Thin conceptions of procedural justice could
produce what Jeremy Bentham  [*2083]  called "sham security,"  n112 leaving some
individuals with a vague sense that they have been treated justly while
neglecting more fundamental questions of justice.

   An expanded theoretical approach understands distrust as a problem of legal
estrangement: a marginal and ambivalent relationship with society, the law, and
predominant social norms that emanates from institutional and legal failure. In
the following Part, I discuss estrangement theory and its distinctions from
police legitimacy theory in greater detail. The legal estrangement perspective
can provide a fresh perspective in research and policy on the extent to which
African Americans and people who live in high-poverty communities feel a sense
of solidarity with law enforcement and other legal institutions. Moreover, this
approach could help scholars and policymakers imagine new ways to promote
solidarity and social inclusion through law and policy.

B. A Crisis of Estrangement

   While legitimacy theory has its roots in Weber,  n113 the distinctive
elements of legal estrangement theory are rooted in Émile Durkheim. For
Durkheim, the central project of modern society is to maintain "organic
solidarity," defined as social cohesion based on fulfillment of the different
functions each person serves within society.  n114 Ideally, law's function is to
create and maintain social cohesion. Law is not understood as an end in itself,
nor solely a means of bodily control.  n115 In the Durkheimian view, the purpose
of criminal justice is to restore those who break the law, with the ultimate
goal of increasing social cohesion by reinforcing moral and legal norms.  n116 A
society that does not reinforce moral norms, and does not promote social trust,
leaves its inhabitants in a state of anomie, with broken social bonds.

    [*2084]  Although Durkheim originated the concept of anomie, the idea gained
greater precision (and liberation from its purely pro-state perspective) in the
work of Robert Merton. For Merton, anomie is "a breakdown in the cultural
structure" of society.  n117 These breakdowns are particularly likely to occur
"when there is an acute disjunction between the cultural norms and goals and the
socially structured capacities of members of the group to act in accord with
them."  n118 In other words, cultural structures break down when, despite a
group's adoption of "mainstream" cultural norms and goals, certain aspects of
the social structure prevent them from being able to act in ways that support
those norms and goals. Although the suitability of Durkheim's comprehensive view
of law and punishment for modern contexts is questionable,  n119 the broadest
reading of anomie theory--that the purpose of the legal system is to create a
cohesive and inclusive society, and that a broken social order leaves some
people without the resources for full social membership--is at the root of legal
estrangement theory.

A century after Durkheim originated the anomie concept and decades after Merton
refined it, sociologists Robert Sampson and Dawn Jeglum Bartusch offered "legal
cynicism" as a framework for understanding how residents of predominantly
African American neighborhoods in Chicago thought about the law and its
enforcers.  n120 Sampson and Bartusch defined legal cynicism as "'anomie' about
law."  n121 Anomie is more than distrust. Instead, it is a sense that the very
fabric of the social world is in chaos--a sense of social estrangement,
meaninglessness, and powerlessness, often a result of structural instability and
social change.  n122 It is a sense founded on legal and institutional exclusion
and  [*2085]  liminality.  n123 Perhaps the strongest articulation of legal
anomie comes from eminent ethnographer Elijah Anderson, who credited the
tendency to use extra-legal forms of violence among some of his research
subjects in inner-city Philadelphia to "the profound sense of alienation from
mainstream society and its institutions felt by many poor inner-city black
people . . . ."  n124 In contrast, law that is well designed and properly
enforced should reassure community members that society has not abandoned them,
that they are engaged in a collective project of making the social world.

   One concern with labeling "anomie about law" as "legal cynicism" is that the
word "cynicism" suggests that the attitudinal perspective of communities is the
issue of interest rather than the process that led to a cultural orientation
toward distrusting the police. The "legal cynicism" term works for the approach
taken by Sampson and Bartusch as well as that of Kirk and Papachristos, as both
seek to link "legal cynicism" (as measured in a survey) with a number of
outcomes. However, anomie refers not only to the subjective feeling of concern;
it is also meant to implicate a particular set of structural conditions that
produced that subjective feeling.  n125 I use "legal estrangement" in this Essay
to better capture the fullness of the idea of anomie about law. Legal
estrangement can help scholars understand situations where, even despite the
embrace of legality by African Americans and residents of high-poverty
neighborhoods, and regardless of the degree to which they embrace law
enforcement officials as legitimate  [*2086]  authorities, they are nonetheless
structurally ostracized through law's ideals and priorities.

   The theoretical and empirical genealogies of legitimacy and legal cynicism
reveal important distinctions. First, the overwhelming majority of the
legitimacy research has sought to describe a general perception of law
enforcement and legal authority, based on a representative sample of the public.
n126 In contrast, scholarship on legal cynicism--the attitudinal portion of
legal estrangement theory--has generally sought to describe a contextualized,
ecological view of law enforcement. This scholarship has particularly focused
its efforts on understanding the nature of the fraught relationship between
African Americans and high-poverty communities on the one hand, and the police
on the other.  n127

   Legal estrangement is a cultural and systemic mechanism that exists both
within and beyond individual perceptions. It is partly representative of a state
of anomie related to the law and legal authorities, and it interacts with legal
and other structural conditions--for example, poverty, racism, and gender
hierarchy--to maintain segregation and dispossession. The salience of a
targeted, collective, community-oriented analysis is even greater when seeking
to understand the realities that gave birth to Black Lives Matter. Many scholars
and advocates have argued that African Americans are particularly likely to
assess the legitimacy, effectiveness, and justness of institutions based on
their beliefs about how these institutions treat African Americans as a group,
and not just their individual experiences.  n128

   A person could simultaneously see the police as a legitimate authority
(believing that individuals should obey officer commands in the abstract) and
feel estranged from the police (believing that the legal system and law
enforcement,  [*2087]  as the individual's group experiences these institutions,
are fundamentally flawed and chaotic, and therefore send negative messages about
the group's societal belonging).  n129 Some scholarship on the legal mistrust of
poor African Americans could be misread to suggest that a large subset of this
group possesses values that are antithetical to law-abiding behavior, almost as
if these individuals do not care what the law is and do not believe they should
be bound by it. A better-supported interpretation is that many poor African
Americans might see police as a legitimate authority in the ideal, and might
even empathize with some police officers' plight, but they find the police as a
whole too corrupt, unpredictable, or biased to deem them trustworthy.  n130 Even
as they accept the ideal vision of the police as the state-authorized securers
of public safety, their nonideal working theory might be, as earlier research
suggests, that the police are "just another gang."  n131

   Estrangement theory can improve legitimacy theory in three main ways.
First--certainly in its initial stages--legitimacy theory has emphasized whether
people feel voluntarily obligated to obey or cooperate with law enforcement. The
theoretical starting point of legitimacy analysis is whether and how the state
maintains and exercises its power. In an analysis based on legal estrangement
theory, increasing the power of the state bears at most a spurious relationship
to the outcome of concern, which is social inclusion across groups. From a
robust legal estrangement perspective, the law's purpose is the creation and
maintenance of social bonds. An emphasis on inclusion implies concerns not only
about how individuals perceive the police and the law (and thus whether those
individuals cooperate with the state's demands), but about the  [*2088]
signaling function of the police and the law to groups about their place in
society. While legitimacy theorists might acknowledge the value of these sorts
of community feelings, they are not those theorists' key variables of interest.
n132 Shifting the orientation of legitimacy theory from governmental power to
social inclusion is one way that theory can better capture the concerns of
activists in the era of Black Lives Matter.

   Second, given its origins in legal cynicism theory, a legal estrangement
perspective emphasizes cultural orientation toward the police rather than
individual attitudes about the police. A cultural inquiry is concerned with the
symbolic and structural meaning of the police to particular groups of people, as
opposed to those individuals' opinions about police interactions. People's
opinions about their interactions with the police, their beliefs about whether
the police in general tend to be helpful, and the symbolic meanings they attach
to the police can be sharply divergent from each other.  n133

   Third, while most legitimacy theorists treat individuals as their unit of
analysis and theorization, the legal estrangement framework is ultimately
focused on groups and communities. Even as studies are unavoidably conducted by
looking at individual experiences, the broader concern of legal estrangement is
with understanding people in situ. Viewing distrust of the law as a problem of
social psychological legitimacy suggests more micro-level solutions to the
problem, centered on changing individual perceptions of the law and law
enforcement. Conversely, seeing distrust as a problem of legal estrangement
(legal anomie) focuses solutions on unsettling characteristics of the social
structure. The goal is to enable marginalized groups to align their values of
law-abiding and respect for law enforcement with their lived experiences and
strategies for interacting with law enforcement.

 [*2089]  TABLE 1.
LEGITIMACY AND LEGAL ESTRANGEMENT  n134
                             Legitimacy               Legal Estrangement
Theoretical
Genesis                         Weber                      Durkheim
Analytical
Focus                        Individual            Collective/culture  n135

Vision of                Trust and voluntary
the Ideal                compliance with law           Social inclusion
                             enforcement

Core Social              Noncompliance with               Anomie, or
Problem                        the law               collective alienation
Solution
                         Procedural justice             Procedural and
                                                     structural inclusion


 [*2090]  III. THE LEGAL SOCIALIZATION  n136 OF SHAWNA

   To more clearly illustrate some on-the-ground improvements that a legal
estrangement perspective offers to legitimacy theory, this Part presents a
portrait of Shawna. Shawna is one of sixty-four participants in Hearing Their
Voices: Understanding the Freddie Gray Uprising, a study I led a few months
after the Freddie Gray incident and subsequent unrest in Baltimore.  n137 The
purpose of this profile is to articulate, in a more grounded way, key
distinctions between what scholars and policymakers usually learn from a police
legitimacy perspective  [*2091]  and what they can learn from a legal
estrangement perspective. Shawna  n138 has a complex, but largely distrustful,
perspective on the police. This Part and the vignettes in Part IV capture, in a
more textured fashion, the multitude of factors that can contribute to legal
estrangement.  n139

   * * *

   Growing up in West Baltimore's Gilmor Homes in the mid-aughts, Shawna
developed an affinity for chess, American Sign Language, and most of all, pickup
basketball. "I just played basketball all day, every day. Nine o'clock in the
morning until nine o'clock at night when my mom was calling me to get off the
court, that's where I was at."  n140

   During Baltimore's sticky summers--the time of year when the rate of violent
crime is at its apex  n141 --Shawna sought freedom and community on
Sandtown-Winchester's asphalt basketball courts. One can imagine Shawna sucking
in the steamy air, wearing basketball shoes not unlike the red and white Nikes
she is wearing now, teasing her opponents, being a kid. "I wanted to stay
outside as long as I can," she explained. "Stay outside until nine or ten
o'clock, in the summer time especially, yes. That's when the most violence
happens, but that's when the most fun happens." Shawna understood pleasure more
viscerally than danger, despite everything she had seen.

   One of Shawna's first virtues was vigilance. She learned early how to manage
the potentially deadly situation of being outdoors in the Gilmor Homes. "Just
being so young, you have to be aware. I mean, you can have fun, but just be
aware of what's really going on around you. There was so much drug activity.
But, being so young, I didn't really pay a lot of attention because I was just
worried about having fun."

   Despite the pestilence of untimely death that--then and now--marks her
neighborhood,  n142 Shawna has thus far been spared the memory of seeing a
[*2092]  human being die. But she is familiar with the pop-pop-pop of gunshots
interrupting a basketball game. She can still hear the hum of an open-windowed
truck rolling closer while prowling for targets, the screams of neighbors
recognizing a familiar horror, the thumps of her playmates' chests hitting the
ground seeking safety, and the thuds of their shoes rapidly beating the hot
asphalt where they had been dribbling a ball moments earlier. She remembers that
a sudden paralysis afflicted her limbs on those occasions. She remembers that
her mother would run to her, corral her. "Somebody would get shot. Somebody
would get killed. Somebody would get stabbed. Outside my house, in front of my
house, on the basketball court, where I spent most of my time there, for real."

   Shawna's mother Denise was, in Shawna's estimation, "paranoid." Every now and
then, Denise got fed up and called the police about various neighborhood
disturbances. "She's a good person," Shawna explained. But Denise avoided
calling the police from her own phone and instead went to a neighbor's home to
call. To be sure, Denise sometimes called police from a neighbor's phone because
her own phone was disconnected. But Shawna suspects that the more usual reason
Denise called from her neighbor's phone was so the call would come from a number
other than hers, making it more difficult for police and potential retaliators
to learn that she was the snitch. "She had to call from some [other] number
because she just--it was unsafe for her." People can call the police
"anonymously,"  n143 but Denise suspected the police would find out who she was
anyway, and that they would be too careless to protect her identity.

   Denise warned Shawna about crime in the neighborhood and kept Shawna indoors
as much as the active, extroverted girl could tolerate. Denise also warned
Shawna about the neighborhood's police, petrified by her daughter's awe of them.

   "[W]hen I was little," Shawna recalled, "I used to idolize the police. And I
used to be like, 'Oh, can I be like you when I grow up? What is it that you do?'
Asking them a whole bunch of questions." Her mother urged her to stay away from
police officers. Once, when Shawna was about eight years old, she was chatting
with two white police officers who she thinks were in the neighborhood to
investigate drug activity. As Shawna remembers it, she asked the officers what
they do, how she could become a police officer, and so on. "I was a serious
[*2093]  young lady," Shawna joked. Denise saw Shawna with the officers and
panicked. "Get over here! Get over here! Get over here, girl!" Shawna asked,
"[W]hat did I do?" Denise continued, agitated. "Who told you to talk to them?
They can do anything to you. They can take you and kill you!" Shawna was
perplexed. "They're police. Why would they just take me and kill me?"

   Over the decade or so since that incident, Shawna's once-pristine view of
police has grown ever more tainted. This tarnishing process has been propelled
not only by her personal experiences, but also through witnessing the encounters
of her friends and neighbors, hearing about other incidents through television
and social media, and gaining folk wisdom from family and older community
members. For example, several years before the Daniel Holtzclaw case broke,
n144 as a pubescent girl, Shawna learned from her grandmother that the police
could rape her.


     I don't know the whole story, but my grandma told me how one of the
     police in my community . . . some man had taken this little girl. She
     was about twelve. I don't know if she was missing or if he just took
     her anyway. He took her and he raped her in the back of the police
     station and they caught it on camera. Then my grandmother told me
     about it. I was like twelve at the time, which was just a couple of
     years [after the rape]. I was like, "Wow."

   Shawna's confusion grew. "The police is supposed to have power and supposed
to be using it for good." But the police also "did that to that little girl.
It's just terrible." That story, funneled through her beloved grandmother, is
now embedded in her psyche and colors her more recent experiences with and
observations of police officers. "That just made me think twice about the police
ever since then. I just don't know."

   The case Shawna is likely referencing involved William D. Welch, a former
Baltimore police officer who entered an Alford plea  n145 to a charge of
misconduct in office in early 2008, when Shawna was ten.  n146 After another
officer arrested a  [*2094]  sixteen-year-old girl based on an open warrant for
prostitution, Welch allegedly offered to dispose of marijuana that was in her
possession if she sexually serviced him. According to the accuser, she and Welch
flushed the marijuana down a police station toilet and returned to the interview
room, where she complied with his conditions.  n147 Prosecutors originally
charged Welch with second-degree rape. However, after the police department's
Evidence Control Unit misplaced much of the physical evidence against Welch,
prosecutors offered, and Welch accepted, a plea deal.  n148 Welch thus avoided
prison. A judge sentenced Welch to a suspended ten-year prison term after three
years of probation and ordered him to resign from the Baltimore Police
Department.  n149

   But Shawna might have been talking about a different case. There were other
prominent rape cases against Baltimore police officers in roughly the same time
period. Like the Welch case, the facts of those cases do not perfectly align
with the story lodged in Shawna's mind today.  n150

   Shawna's understanding of the police grew darker still through encounters and
observations at the bus station near the iconic Mondawmin Mall, arguably West
Baltimore's central hub. Mondawmin, one of the city's oldest enclosed shopping
malls, is more than a retail center. It is also the nerve center for ten West
Baltimore bus lines and the location of government social services offices and
various health clinics.  n151 Inside the mall, uniformed private security guards
are tasked with maintaining Mondawmin's security, while on the outside, Western
District police officers handle the job. Shawna does not distinguish  [*2095]
between the public and private police. She just knows that when she is in or
near Mondawmin, she encounters hostile people in uniform.  n152 Shawna reports
several negative encounters there, but nothing that would earn the attention of
journalists, researchers, or most advocates. She has experienced, at most,
(possibly idle) threats--that the next time a police officer sees her, he will
mace or even arrest her. These threats, these forceful words, would not register
as "uses of force" in the most sophisticated studies of police encounters.  n153
Yet they have constrained her movement. The grind of injustice has led Shawna to
avoid Mondawmin as much as possible, though the mall's ubiquity makes it hard to
fully escape.


     I stopped going to Mondawmin because the police up there are rude. I
     mean, I know you're trying to keep order and peace, but you don't have
     to disrespect me and threaten me every five seconds. They threatened
     to mace people if they don't get to their bus stop. Then the man told
     me he was going to arrest me because I was talking to my home girl and
     I wouldn't get on the bus. It wasn't my bus. I was at the bus stop
     talking to her. Why are you threatening to arrest me?

    [*2096]  Shawna claims that the officer followed her and her friend after
they began to walk away. "He kept getting smart with his little cowboy boots. I
was just like, 'Who are these police?' Like, where did they come from?" Shawna
had a few stories from Mondawmin, including watching a young man get arrested
who "wasn't probably all innocent" but in her view "wasn't doing anything he
wasn't supposed to be doing."

   The Gilmor Homes, where Shawna spent the first sixteen of her nineteen years,
has recently been in the national media as the home of Freddie Gray, the
twenty-five-year-old Baltimore man who died in police custody on April 19, 2015.
n154 Mondawmin was a starting site of the ensuing "riots."  n155 Shawna was
nearby when the riots broke out, trying to head to a friend's house for
spaghetti.

   Shawna's views on the riots vacillate from empathy for the good police
officers who have been unfairly demonized, to frustration at the destruction of
already limited West Baltimore institutions, to condemnation of unjust police
practices, to pragmatic belief in the necessity of the police. "I felt bad for
the police though, when they were rioting. They were throwing bricks at the
police cars and all this other stuff . . . . First of all, you're going to need
them. Second of all, every police officer is not bad." Belying usual portrayals
of people like Shawna in the media and in most research, Shawna readily
acknowledges the humanity of officers and the heterogeneity of police forces.
"[H]e's got kids too. He's got to live too. He's got to eat too, and if he
wanted to be a police officer, that doesn't mean every police officer is bad."
Still, "some of them have to go."

   Despite the negative representation of Baltimore youth in the national media
during the riots and what she sees as the inherent wrong of riotous behavior,
Shawna has ambivalently started to believe that the riots were a necessary
[*2097]  catalyst for the police officers to face criminal charges.  n156 "It
might not be right to riot, but if they wouldn't have done that, they would
never have pressed charges on [the police officers] . . . . It might have been
terrible for our community and made us look a mess, especially to the nation, to
everybody who saw it." Shawna is upset that some leaders used the controversial
term "thugs" when referring to Baltimore rioters. Despite not participating in
the riot herself, Shawna felt that the label was directed at young African
American West Baltimoreans in general. "It really hurt my feelings that they
called us thugs. I saw a video on that too."

   "They" included President Obama, who described the rioters as "criminals and
thugs who tore up the place";  n157 Maryland governor Larry Hogan, who depicted
them as "gangs of thugs whose only intent was to bring violence and destruction
to the city";  n158 Baltimore City Council President Bernard C. "Jack" Young,
who distinguished between legitimate Sandtown-Winchester residents and "thugs
seizing upon an opportunity";  n159 and Baltimore Mayor Stephanie
Rawlings-Blake, who lamented that young rioters were disrespecting the legacy
[*2098]  of people who had fought for the city in the past. "Too many people
have spent generations building up this city for it to be destroyed by thugs
who, in a very senseless way, are trying to tear down what so many have fought
for," Rawlings-Blake said.  n160 After extensive criticism, Rawlings-Blake and
Young backed away from using the term "thug."  n161 The White House stood behind
the President's choice of words.  n162

   Talking with us only a few weeks after the murder of nine people in
Charleston, South Carolina's Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church,  n163
Shawna compared Charleston officers' humane treatment of shooter Dylann Roof
with Baltimore officers' aggression toward Freddie Gray. She shook her head with
disgust. "They bought him Burger King. They bought him Burger King, but they
couldn't even get Freddie Gray to a hospital."  n164 I asked Shawna how she knew
about all of these things--the details of Freddie Gray's arrest, the series of
"thug" speeches, and the Burger King trip for Dylann Roof. "It was on Facebook.
A lot of things are on Facebook," Shawna pointed out.

    [*2099]  Later, I asked her, "Do you want to be a police officer anymore?"
"Whoa," Shawna chuckled, "I gave that dream up." Now entering her final year of
high school, Shawna desultorily explained that her goals for the next several
years are to "just better myself in the years to come. That's what I want to do.
I just want to be better."

   * * *

   The legitimacy perspective would offer an incomplete diagnosis of the
unsettled relationship between the police and someone like Shawna--a thoughtful
young woman who has never had any serious police encounter, who has managed to
avoid getting a criminal record, and who is a general law-abider, wanting to
trust the police but convinced that the police are not trustworthy for people
like her. Shawna is generally compliant with the law and believes police
officers should be respected. She thinks that it is good to help police
officers, and she appreciates that her mother would stealthily report crime.
From a law enforcement perspective, people like Shawna are allies and assets to
the community. Shawna behaves like someone who views the police as a legitimate
legal authority.

   Yet Shawna's views also reflect a deep sense of alienation about police. She
stopped going to the mall to avoid interacting with the officers there. She
abandoned her childhood dream of becoming a police officer, even though she
possesses the presence, personality, and background to be an excellent law
enforcement official. She fears that police might kill or sexually assault
someone like her: a young, low-income black woman who lives in West Baltimore.
Although Shawna sees the law and its enforcers as worthy of obedience as a
theoretical matter, she does not believe that law enforcement officials see her,
and people like her, as a true part of the polity. She is nothing more than a
"thug." This understanding of her group's place in the world does not lead to
lawbreaking or noncooperation, as a legitimacy perspective might predict.  n165
Yet her words nonetheless reveal a cleavage, or estrangement, from the enforcers
of the law. Her story reveals that the empirical outcome that legitimacy theory
is best used to explain is the wrong outcome: Shawna's problem is not
noncompliance, but symbolic community exclusion.

 [*2100]  IV. A TRIPARTITE THEORY OF LEGAL ESTRANGEMENT

   To this point, this Essay has argued that scholars and policymakers should
understand persistent police distrust among African Americans and residents of
high-poverty communities as a problem of legal estrangement, a cultural
orientation about the law that emanates from collective symbolic and structural
exclusion--that is, both subjective and objective factors. In this Part, I
further define legal estrangement theory. I argue that legal estrangement is a
product of three socio-legal processes: procedural injustice, vicarious
marginalization, and structural exclusion. All of these processes are supported
in the empirical literature, although their primary justifications emerge from
theory. Below, I explain each process in greater detail, drawing upon the
literature and offering real-world illustrations from qualitative data.

A. Procedural Injustice

   Building from the legitimacy and procedural justice scholarship described in
Part II, I argue that experiences in which individuals feel treated unfairly by
the police are one key provocateur of legal estrangement. The procedural
injustice component operates at the individual and attitudinal level but, writ
large, expands to the cultural level.  n166 Survey research indicates that a
feeling that the police have behaved disrespectfully feeds into an overall
disbelief in the legitimacy of the law and law enforcement.  n167 The path to
legitimacy, from a procedural justice perspective, requires "treatment with
dignity and respect, acknowledgment of one's rights and concerns, and a general
awareness of the importance of recognizing people's personal status and identity
and treating those with respect, even while raising questions about particular
conduct."  n168

   Consider the example of Justin,  n169 an eighteen-year-old African American
man living in Northeast Baltimore who is heading to a small religious college
out of state on an athletic scholarship. (He had wanted to aim for an Ivy League
school because his high school grades were strong, but according to him, his SAT
score was nearly 100 points shy of the baseline.) Justin's police encounters
typify and bleed into a general feeling that he is socially and politically
[*2101]  powerless. The criminal justice system "just get[s] so irritating, just
to know you can't do nothing about it," he groused. "You have a voice, but then
it's your voice and billions of other voices. If everybody's not together and
its one side against the other, your voice basically doesn't matter. It just
gets so frustrating how disrespectful somebody with high power can be. It just
gets annoying."

   To illustrate his point about disrespect from people in power, Justin told us
about his most recent police encounter.  n170 He and his friends were in Hunt
Valley, a small suburb just north of Baltimore city limits, known for its
expansive, recently reinvigorated outdoor shopping mall. At around 11:30 PM, as
they walked toward the light rail station that would carry them home to West
Baltimore, they were stopped by a police officer. They were walking in the
street along one side; they felt more comfortable walking in the road than on
the sidewalk because there were woods on either side of the street. "It's night
time. I don't want to be over there. For one, you got to think, there's
mosquitoes, ticks, and stuff like that. People could be hiding over there."
n171 According to Justin, the officer pulled them over, questioned them about
what they were doing, and ran all of their information. The officer ultimately
only gave them warnings for walking in the street. Justin repeated the charge,
still with a hint of disbelief. "For walking in the street. For walking in the
street!"  n172

    [*2102]  What irked Justin more than the warning, though, was the police
officer's apparent disregard for their travel timetable. While they were
stopped, Justin and his friends told the officer that they were on their way to
the light rail station and that they needed to get there quickly because the
rail stops running at midnight. They were not sure when the last train to
Baltimore would depart, so they were trying to get there as soon as possible.
The officer assured them that they would make their train. Yet by the time he
checked their information and issued their warning tickets, it was approximately
12:05 AM. Justin's bitterness about missing the train had not yet faded. "When I
say they didn't let us go until about 12:05! They didn't let us go until 12:05
and only gave us warnings--for walking in the street."

   Justin now expects that the police will not value his time. He has resigned
himself to this signal of his own inconsequentiality.


     Whatever it is, whatever you need, go ahead, because now I know we on
     your time, now. Once you stop me, even if I did nothing wrong, we on
     your time. So I might as well just get it over with, let you do what
     you're going to do. I know you're going to be disrespectful. I'm
     prepared for that. I know you're going to be disrespectful. It's up to
     me how I'm going to react to that.

   When asked if he had other experiences like that one, Justin could not answer
precisely. He knows that he has been stopped many times, but he tries not to
dwell on those encounters, preferring to focus on school, work, sports, and
"females." He also tries to minimize the importance of race in this unnamed
number of police encounters. "I just hate the way how they can be so
disrespectful to us like we're not human or nothing. It's like this stereotype
where you think a young African American--or not even a young African American,
just a young individual, period, just walking, you think they're up to
something." He tries instead to look at his police encounters from a power and
authority perspective, in part just to avoid the stress of seeing the world as
racist.  n173 "People who have never had power before, they finally get power,
and they want to abuse it. I try my best not to look at it as a racial thing
because I  [*2103]  know that's only going to make me mad and stress me out. So,
I try to look at it from all angles."

   Justin is an ambitious young man, one of the few in the sample who had the
good fortune of having solid college plans. He has carefully curated his group
of friends to include only those who "keep each other focused," mostly fellow
college-bound athletes. If Justin had been answering a survey about legal
compliance, there is a reasonable chance that he would have marked that he
adheres to most laws and believes that it is important to do so. Yet he deeply
distrusts the police, partly because he believes that they treat him and other
young Baltimoreans with disrespect in order to assert their authority.  n174 In
addition, he has serious doubts about whether the police would be helpful if he
needed them, saying that no matter what the issue was, he would not call the
police: "I call the police--I'm not doing nothing for nobody. If I call the
police, there's a possibility they might turn on me." Those feelings of being
both under surveillance and unprotected have created a devil's brew of legal
estrangement such that even a youth like Justin, who has thus far been able to
avoid the criminalization process common for young men of color,  n175 would
rather pursue extralegal help with neighborhood concerns than trust in the
police.

   As for the midnight police encounter: on the facts as Justin presented them,
there is little doubt that the stop was lawful. The officer saw Justin and his
friends walking in the middle of the street in violation of Maryland state law.
n176 He stopped them, asked them what they were doing, ran their identification
(apparently finding no open warrants), and sent them on their way with only a
warning. Justin had two problems with the stop: he feels that the very reason
they were stopped was generalized suspicion of young people (and possibly young
black people), and that the officer did not care that this stop caused them to
miss their ride home. This stop was less awful than it could have been, but it
factors heavily into Justin's concerns about the police and the larger social
structure.

    [*2104]  Justin's story illustrates how procedural injustice, even at a
relatively minor level, creates and reinforces legal estrangement. The
legitimacy literature, though concerned with procedural injustice, does not
offer an account that illuminates Justin's concerns about the police: he
willingly complied with the officer's commands, not out of fear but from a sense
that, generally speaking, he ought to obey the instructions of law enforcement
officers. However, the experience nonetheless contributed to his sense that
there is a schism between young Baltimoreans and the police. Yet procedural
injustice is only one leg of legal estrangement's three-legged stool. The
benefits of a legal estrangement perspective emerge more clearly when
considering the additional processes of vicarious marginalization and structural
exclusion.

B. Vicarious Marginalization

   The second contributor to legal estrangement discussed here is vicarious
marginalization: the marginalizing effect of police maltreatment that is
targeted toward others. Although the literature on legal socialization,
legitimacy, and legal cynicism vaguely acknowledges the influence of police
experiences within people's social networks and the impact of highly publicized
misconduct on cultural orientations about the law, the scholarly treatment of
vicarious experience is thin relative to the treatment of personal experience.
n177 This deficit is, in part, a disciplinary artifact. Most legal socialization
and legal legitimacy research draws from social psychology, which by definition
focuses primarily on understanding individuals' internal lives and how they
relate to their personal interactions and behaviors.  n178 The legitimacy
literature has been interested in generalized views and "societal orientations,"
but it focuses mostly on whether one can generalize from personal experiences
instead of whether and how impersonal,  [*2105]  vicarious experiences also
contribute to social orientations.  n179 Sociological and socio-legal theory, in
contrast, provides a theoretical grounding for the idea that other people's
negative experiences with the police, whether those people are part of one's
personal network or not, feed into a more general, cultural sense of alienation
from the police.  n180 Legal estrangement is born of the cumulative, collective
experience of procedural and substantive injustice.

   In the study of incarceration, scholars have developed a clearer view of the
cultural contagiousness of criminal justice contact. For example, Naomi Sugie
finds that the female romantic partners of formerly incarcerated men are less
likely to vote, to register to vote, and to believe that voting is important
than similarly situated women who are not partnered with a formerly incarcerated
man.  n181 While voting and registering are behaviors, the belief that voting is
important is an attitude that might, in the aggregate, reach the level of a
cultural orientation. Along similar lines, Megan Comfort argues that the
romantic partners of men serving time in prison undergo a process of "secondary
prisonization," adopting routinized behaviors, styles of self-presentation, ways
of speaking, and even sexual desires that are shaped by their vicarious
incarceration.  n182 Researchers are exploring the effects of incarceration on
the worldviews of the children of incarcerated parents.  n183 Moreover, the
vicarious effects of incarceration are not limited to the intimate partners and
children of the incarcerated. For example, in their study of the relationship
between race, mass incarceration, and distrust in the law, Christopher Muller
and Daniel Schrage find that African Americans who had a formerly incarcerated
close  [*2106]  friend or family member were more likely than other African
Americans to blame bias among the police and courts for the criminal justice
system's racial disparities.  n184

   Yet at the front end of the criminal justice continuum, scholars rarely probe
these cultural emergences.  n185 More work needs to be done to examine the
collective memory of police interaction, defined as the cultural conception of
what it is like to interact with the police that emanates in part from
membership in a group or identity category (here, in various degrees, being
African American or residing in a racially and socioeconomically isolated
neighborhood). Collective memories are based on some combination of personal
experience, observing and hearing about the experiences of others, passing
accumulated wisdom from parent to child, observing interactions in public space,
seeing (or not seeing) murals and other forms of public commemoration, watching
television, scrolling through social media, and sharing all of these personal
and vicarious experiences in the community.  n186 In other areas of legal
inquiry, such as constitutional interpretation, state-sponsored mass violence,
interracial marriage, and general racial inequality, scholars have probed the
role that collective memory plays in the law and legal institutions.  n187
Through a combination of major social upheavals and everyday forms of
information gathering, people  [*2107]  come to understand themselves and gain
perspective on what it means to be a part of a group (be it a religion, a race,
or even a business).  n188

   Most studies of collective memory focus on clear, often tragic historical
events that had a cognizable beginning and end, such as American slavery or the
Holocaust.  n189 However, some research and theory argue that there can be
broader sorts of collective memory, such as a "collective memory of racism and
discrimination," that ground people's interpretations of day-to-day interracial
experiences.  n190 In this sense, police maltreatment and discrimination can
also become sites for collective memory and collective identity construction.
Vicarious marginalization in the context of policing, then, is ultimately about
how people draw upon information other than their own experiences as police
targets or suspects to understand their group's common experience with law
enforcement.

   There is no better illustration of how vicarious marginalization might
operate, and what its repercussions might be, than current events involving
police officer maltreatment of African Americans. As explained above,
distrustful relationships between police officers and African American
communities are longstanding and deep-seated. However, the recent stream of
videos of violent police interactions has, along with organizing techniques,
given birth to the Black Lives Matter movement. This movement has elevated
police violence to  [*2108]  the national collective consciousness, sparking
community organizing and policy advocacy.  n191 Some have claimed that the
seemingly ceaseless stream of grisly scenes on television and social media are
giving birth to a new form of race-based posttraumatic stress.  n192 But short
of (or in addition to) race-based trauma, the ritualistic observation of black
men and women having unjust, and often deadly, interactions with law enforcement
conveys a message to their coethnics and other similarly situated observers.
n193 That message might be that the police as a whole are dangerous,
untrustworthy, and opposed to the idea that African Americans and the poor are
truly members of the polity. Group conversations, both in person and through
social media, can crystallize that message.  n194

   Legal estrangement, emerging out of personal and vicarious experiences,
serves as a lens through which many African Americans interpret past and future
engagements with law enforcement officials. Videos of negative police
interactions may elevate personal experiences to a cultural level by
demonstrating to people who have had negative police interactions that their
experiences are not unique. Media coverage that emphasizes particular aspects of
police interactions, such as race, gender, or perceived criminality, provide a
schema for interpreting one's own experiences in ways that positive experiences
may not fully overcome by contributing to conceptions of how police treat
particular groups.  n195 Media coverage may heighten legal estrangement by
providing evidence that we are living in a moment of cultural and legal
instability regarding race and the police, and it may increase culture's power
to drive perhaps undesirable  [*2109]  behavior such as avoiding the police,
refusing to call on them for help, or engaging in law-breaking activity.  n196

   Yet the mechanisms that give birth to vicarious marginalization are not
limited to television and social media. Some youth in the Baltimore sample
reported observing the police mistreating others, whether strangers, parents,
and friends, and they factored those observations into their assessments of
police untrustworthiness. Others talked about the experiences of parents,
siblings, and friends that they did not personally witness, but that were
nonetheless salient in developing their orientations toward police.

   Eighteen-year-old Jamila  n197 lives in the McCulloh Homes family public
housing development  n198 with her mother, her mother's boyfriend, and her eight
siblings. The space is crowded, and the neighborhood is dotted with liquor
stores, payday lenders, and street memorials, institutional and symbolic
indicators of concentrated poverty and heavy crime.  n199 But Jamila is grateful
to be there, more or less. Having spent significant periods of her childhood
bouncing through a series of homes and homeless shelters as her mother cycled
through abusive relationships, Jamila's four years in the McCulloh Homes have
been, in a way, a welcome reprieve.

   The first time Jamila remembers interacting with the police, she was ten and
her mother got into a physical fight with her boyfriend. The officers, who were
both people "of noncolor" (a term Jamila prefers to "white"), spoke to Jamila
and her sister using words they could understand. They walked the two  [*2110]
young girls to the store for snacks, hoping to momentarily distract them from
the violence at home and shield them from the sight of their mother's contused
face. She said it "was a good experience," but she does not believe police
officers today, about eight years later, could reproduce that positive
interaction. "People in enforcement now, there [are] a lot of younger officers
in the force today, than it was then. People really cared about their job then.
Now, people just look at it for the money that they are going to make."  n200

   When Jamila graduated from high school in 2015, she became the first person
in generations of her family to do so. This triumph has inspired her younger
brothers. "That's very big for them--very, very big. And they look up to me
now," Jamila explained to us. One of them, like a younger Shawna, aspires to
enroll in the police academy and join the ranks of police officers. Jamila
appreciates this goal, as she thinks police have an important social role to
play. "Police men and women, at the end of the day, we kind of need them to keep
[the] city safe . . . . But it's how you do it, is what really matters. Because
you can't just walk into a neighborhood and get scared." Jamila herself has
recently completed the first stage of an intensive and competitive
college-readiness program and is preparing to start community college, intending
to transfer into a local bachelor's degree-granting college in two years. Her
long-term goals include studying philosophy and becoming a lawyer. She believes
that practicing law would be the best way to help people: "I love law too,
because I like giving people second chances. Everyone's not a bad person."

   Despite her positive early experience with police, her model citizenship, her
brother's goal of becoming a police officer, her own goal of joining the bar,
and her embrace of the broad role that police can serve, Jamila is profoundly
skeptical that the police--and government officials more generally--value people
from her community. "We need real, real people that care about people . . . Any
kind of state official, anything that has to do with dealing with people, we
need better people." Jamila's assessment of police seems to stem from a mixture
of community wisdom and the experiences of her friends and neighbors.

   A few months ago, Jamila and her friend Rock were waiting outside of a middle
school to walk Rock's brother, a student at the school, home. Jamila and Rock
were about fifteen minutes early. They were hanging out outside to pass the
time, and a police officer came by and asked them to leave. Jamila immediately
[*2111]  started to walk away, as she did not have any reason to be there. Rock,
however, started running away. According to Jamila, running away from police is
a standard practice for young men even when they are clean (i.e., not carrying
anything illegal).  n201 When the officer caught up with Rock, he pushed Rock to
the ground, pulled out his baton, and started beating him with it. The officer
may have searched Rock, but if so, Jamila did not mention it. The officer did
not lock Rock up then, but he seems to have cited him for loitering or some
other minor offense. As Rock lay on the ground, Jamila called his mother.

"The officer just beat him, walked off, and left him there in the parking lot,"
Jamila bitterly recounted. Jamila fears that if she had not been there, Rock
might have died.


     Then what? Would it still have mattered then? Or does it not matter at
     all? And I feel like, they're given too much power. Because they feel
     like, okay they're officers. "I have a gun. I have a badge. You have
     to listen to me. You have to do this. You have to do that." When
     really, you're the same as . . . you're the same person as me, whether
     you know right away. You're the same person. We breathe: just like I
     breathe, you breathe. You bleed just like I bleed. We're the same
     people.

   Jamila's anger is not born primarily of her own experiences; most of her
personal experiences have been positive or neutral. Instead, she tells stories
of the mistreatment of her friends and of African Americans more generally.
n202 "We don't have a good relationship, black people with police, because of
what they're known to [be] doing." She does not specify who knows what police
are doing. There is no active person or group passing these stories along. They
are just "known."

   Jamila also distrusts the media, including both network news and social
media. She believes that both of these sources are advancing a destructive
racial trope about the nature of police-community relations in Baltimore.
"[M]edia is the cause of all of this," Jamila pontificated, at rapid speed.
"[T]hey kept putting emphasis on white, white, white, white cop, white guy,
white cop, white cop, white guy--they were putting emphasis on it." Jamila
thinks that the narrative about Freddie Gray promoted through broadcast and
social media is responsible for the April 2015 unrest: "If the media didn't
broadcast it as big as  [*2112]  they did," she argued, "it wouldn't have
happened like this. Because people started reacting when they came on to the
news, and it came across on that social media--on that timeline of Facebook and
stuff like that."

   Sticking to her preference for class-based rather than race-based arguments,
Jamila contends that the broadcast media promotes a racial narrative to make
money.


     I used to think that they just want people to [be] aware of what was
     going on. But then, how they started wording things: "Another white
     cop kills blacks, another unarmed black teen." . . . I feel they got
     the outcome they wanted. I feel like, they wanted people to react and
     get mad. Because as views go up, they get paid more money.

   Jamila rejects this narrative, arguing that instead of race, "it's bigger
than that. This is a nation[al] problem; it's worldwide." Although Jamila's
specific critique of the media's racial analysis was at times hard to follow,
her general argument was that the government is interested in maintaining brute
authority in any way that it can. Thus, the media narrative surrounding
Baltimore's policing troubles distracts people with a partial
explanation--race--instead of forcing them to confront the fuller explanation:
maintenance of social and economic hegemony at all levels.

   Of course, not all Baltimore youth shared Jamila's particular take on the
role of race or her skepticism of all media. Myron,  n203 for example, was
thrilled at the broadcast media's coverage of the Freddie Gray incident. Using
"news" like a verb, he related, "I'm glad they finally newsed our shit." Myron
is pleased that these incidents, which have been going on for years in his
estimation, were deemed newsworthy. The broadcast media attention spurred a
shift in the social media experience as well: "Finally, Facebook and Instagram
went to something other than us killing each other or fighting each other. They
finally went to something like helping us, broadcasting what they're doing to
us." Johnson  n204 had yet another take, disparaging broadcast media coverage in
similar tones to Jamila, but viewing the use of video and social media as a way
to offer an alternative narrative. "[I]f the media was here now, they [would] be
saying some crazy things about a situation instead of the truth about it," he
contended. "That's another reason why people need to actually [be] active into
social media a little bit more . . . . [I]n order to find the truth, you need to
have your  [*2113]  phone out, tweet things, take videos about things." While
opinions of these media sources vary, young people commonly consume them and
deploy them as filters to understand the experience of being policed in
Baltimore.

   A few days before our interview, Jamila saw an officer in her courtyard,
surrounded by a crowd of children, blasting the popular song "Watch Me (Whip/Nae
Nae)"  n205 and dancing. Some of the children took out their phones to record.
(Indeed, there have been several similar officer-dance videos from jurisdictions
across the country over the past two years, often using the Whip/Nae Nae song.)
n206 When the officer left, the children told him goodbye, a nicety between
community kids and the police that Jamila had never seen before. Jamila
appreciated the gesture. "When I seen that, I was like, 'Yeah.' I kind of, like,
gave the officer a nod. Because that's a good thing . . . . You usually don't
see that." At the same time, she does not expect the encounter to make much of a
change in the way she sees police, or in the way other adults from her community
perceive police. "Once a man's mind's already made up, there's no telling him
different."

   Pathways of vicarious marginalization, such as stories from family members,
witnessing friends' interactions, and watching videos and media coverage of
strangers' experiences of police-related violence and injustice, are poorly
considered in current theory and policy. The legitimacy approach tends to
deemphasize the importance of interlocking social contexts, including peer
influences.  n207 The existence of these pathways is not surprising, though,
when one considers what social scientists have long understood about the
stickiness  [*2114]  of negative events in the human memory,  n208 the
socialization function of family and friend networks,  n209 the ways culture is
created and transmitted,  n210 and the social construction of knowledge.  n211
Personal experience with the police is only one stick in the bundle of
information that people use to form their perspectives on law enforcement. How
they understand the policing experiences of others varies based in part on their
relationship with the person who had the interaction and--especially when the
vicarious experience comes through a viral police video--varies based on how
well the experience at issue matches up with metanarratives about the police.
Shared narratives about how the police treat African Americans and people who
live in poor communities propel legal estrangement. To reduce legal
estrangement, counternarratives that focus on respect and value for black and
poor lives must emerge and take root.

C. Structural Exclusion

   The third part of the theory of legal estrangement is structural exclusion.
This component describes the ways in which policies that may appear facially
race- and class-neutral distribute policing resources so that African Americans
and residents of disadvantaged neighborhoods tend to receive lower-quality
policing than whites and residents of other neighborhoods.  n212 Laws and
policies produce and normalize vastly different experiences by race and class.
n213 The apparent neutrality of most modern laws and policies means that even
those who are disadvantaged under them might not fully perceive them as
discriminatory.  n214 These policies serve as a form of legal closure, a means
of hoarding  [*2115]  legal resources for the socially and socioeconomically
advantaged while locking marginalized groups out of the benefits of law
enforcement. This idea draws from the theory of social closure.  n215 The
process of legal closure leaves some areas essentially lawless--harshly policed
yet underprotected  n216--while others may be rigorously defended over and above
the degree to which they are at risk.

   The concept of legal closure acknowledges that there are both losers and
winners in the current policing regime. Current scholarship and policymaking
focuses on how to address problems with the losers without examining the current
system's beneficiaries. Part of the reason that the harshest and least effective
police officers can be found in high-poverty communities is because department
policies on pay and seniority, as well as state laws on officer wages and
additional employment, send the most experienced and highest-paid police
officers to the wealthiest areas. Residents of wealthier urban and suburban
neighborhoods benefit from the current policing regime; this insight reframes
the problem that police reform attempts to address as not only a problem of
racism or poverty, but a problem of inequality in access to the machinery of the
law.  n217 The structural exclusion prong of legal estrangement theory also
emphasizes that police violence is not primarily a problem of wayward officers
or misunderstood suspects, but instead a problem embedded in the legal system
itself.

    [*2116]  One indicator that poor African Americans in particular have been
excluded from police resources is that police repeatedly fail to respond, or to
respond in a timely fashion, when they are called.  n218 Structural exclusion
often occurs in ways that community members do not recognize, but police
nonresponse is an inequality that community members often notice, and it is
usually evidence of local, state, and federal policy decisions. In response to
police abandonment, marginalized people seeking protection or redress of
grievances have generally turned to "self-help," either by calling upon family
members or friends (and thus increasing violence in the aggregate),  n219 or by
creating or enlisting the help of informal institutions.

   For example, Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh's historical and ethnographic account of
life in Chicago's now-defunct Robert Taylor Homes describes a series of
alternative community law enforcement groups ("indigenous law enforcement") that
residents used to police themselves after the police abandoned the development
as early as the 1960s.  n220 In the early 1980s, however, as the drug trade grew
and gangs evolved from largely familial enterprises to more impersonal, almost
corporate entities,  n221 those gangs ultimately took over the pseudo-law
enforcement role from the community law enforcement groups.  n222 At no point
did police step in to reclaim meaningful authority within the neighborhood.
n223 The incentive structure for police officers was to avoid neighborhoods like
the  [*2117]  Robert Taylor Homes, particularly in the era before federal policy
incentivized police departments to prevent crime in high-crime neighborhoods.
n224

   Of course, policing has changed since the early days of the Robert Taylor
Homes. Much of the early critique of police officers' treatment of racially and
socioeconomically marginalized neighborhoods (or what many scholars call "the
ghetto") stemmed from law enforcement's neglect of those communities,  n225
leading to some mid-twentieth century racial justice advocates to urge police to
become more active in poor urban neighborhoods.  n226 Yet several forces
converged in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s that shifted the problem from one of
utter neglect to the current problem of overpolicing and underprotection. First,
policing underwent a move toward professionalization, which brought about
improvements such as the use of technology, reliance on evidence (rather than
confessions given during investigations), and requirements that police undergo
more extensive education and standardized training.  n227 However, as part of
the professionalization package, and because of shifts in technology and the
sprawl of cities, departments shifted their tactics from having officers walk a
"beat" (an area that they specifically focused on) to using cars and technology
to respond to calls for service.  n228 Second, partly in reaction to the massive
increase in urban crime during the 1970s, "broken-windows policing" (also known
as order-maintenance or quality-of-life policing) took root in the 1980s and
1990s. This type of policing moved in the opposite direction of the
call-for-service model by urging officers to heavily and proactively enforce
laws against minor criminal activity, particularly in distressed communities.
The shift meant that people in racially and socioeconomically isolated
communities first felt abandoned, then felt heavily monitored--but primarily
monitored only for minor crimes that were not at the heart of their public
safety and security concerns.

    [*2118]  The War on Drugs altered policing as well. Although much of the
critique of the War on Drugs has focused on its hotly debated role in the rise
of mass incarceration,,  n229 the War on Drugs altered the front end of the
criminal justice system--policing--just as significantly. Beginning in the 1970s
and increasingly throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the War on Drugs funded special
narcotics-enforcement police units and gang units across the country, arming
regular police departments with military-grade armor and weaponry, and
authorizing virtually free reign over marginalized neighborhoods.  n230 Because
police often relied on bad information when making busts and conducting raids,
whole communities felt under police suspicion, regardless of whether particular
individuals had done anything to earn that suspicion.  n231

   The twin perils of harsh policing and neglectful policing indicate structural
exclusion from public safety, an exclusion that corresponds with intersecting
race, class, and geographic marginalization. Some scholarship on overpolicing
and underprotection portrays the phenomenon as a gendered and generational
issue, meaning that young people, especially young men, feel overpoliced while
older, "decent" people in poor African American communities feel underprotected.
n232 The reality is far more complex. Many young men, too, would ideally want
the police to protect them and their communities. Patrick Carr, Laura
Napolitano, and Jessica Keating reached this finding in their qualitative
criminology study of an ethnically diverse (Latinx, white, and African American)
sample of young men and women, ages twelve to twenty-three, in three highcrime,
socioeconomically challenged Philadelphia neighborhoods. Although most of the
youths, regardless of race or gender, had a negative disposition toward the
police, most of them--including young African American men--also suggested
greater presence of police and harsher enforcement of the law as  [*2119]  ways
to address crime in their communities.  n233 One way to understand this result
is as a kind of bounded creativity: because these youths were growing up in
high-crime urban neighborhoods in the 1990s and 2000s, a time and place where
the police were highly visible and when alternative community social control
resources were relatively limited, perhaps they could not imagine a world where
the government could use noncriminal justice means to deter crime. This view
would counsel hesitancy before relying on youths' words as true statements of
their ideals.  n234 Yet the authors settle on the explanation that, despite the
youths' negative experiences with the police, they cling to the mainstream
cultural ideal that police should protect them and their communities. Along with
protection, the youths desire procedurally just policing.  n235 The critical
point about structural exclusion is that, despite the youths' cynicism about the
police, they nonetheless believe that the police are failing to provide
protective services to their communities.

   This conflicted desire for police protection is observable in Lemuel's story.
Lemuel is a twenty-four-year-old African American young man who grew up in the
Lexington Terrace housing project in West Baltimore.  n236 Lemuel, unlike
Shawna, Justin, and Jamila, has spent a large portion of his youth engaged in
criminal activity.  n237 Unlike his brothers, one of whom is incarcerated and
one of whom was murdered seven years ago, Lemuel managed to avoid becoming an
official member of any street gang or "clique." (In his terms, he was a "thug,"
not a "gangster.") Mostly, he stole food, sports jerseys, cars, and other
property  [*2120]  with his brother and dealt small amounts of marijuana to earn
a baseline income.


     When I was robbing people, there was a reason why I was doing it. My
     stomach was literally growling, nothing to do. Either I die, starve,
     or I do something. I was too young for a job. I mean, I cut grass
     during the summer. I shoveled snow through the winter. But [what] do
     you do in between?

   Lemuel's family was so poor that his parents made deliberate choices to
forego necessities for their male children. Lemuel mimicked his stepfather with
an acerbic chuckle: "My father, he always said, 'They boys. They don't need no
shoes. They don't need no underwear. They don't need socks.'" The first time he
remembers feeling scared and realizing that his family was very poor, was when
"the eviction people came, and we're holding the door so they won't come in."
Petty theft was Lemuel's family's livelihood. "What we going to do? Whatever you
can do. So we made sure we ate."

   Not surprisingly, Lemuel had numerous run-ins with the police in his younger,
delinquent years. He likened the police he encountered, the "knockers,"
(plainclothes officers assigned to "flex squads" focused on drugs and violent
crime)  n238 to Denzel Washington's character in the 2001 movie Training Day.
n239 According to Lemuel, these officers--all African American  n240--often
[*2121]  wore ski masks. "He don't want you to know who he is because he's about
to do something that he ain't supposed to do." Lemuel says that the "knockers"
would give him an ultimatum during every run-in. They could either take him to
jail, or they could allow him to go home. When a boy took the "go home" option,
"they sit you in the back seat with a knocker back there and they'll beat your
ribs, take all your money out your pocket, leave you in the 'hood that you ain't
supposed to be in."

   One of Lemuel's most formative experiences with a police officer took place
at a high school located in the heart of gang territory. One day when he was
about fifteen years old, Lemuel showed up to school drunk on Bacardi Gold rum.
"At the time, I was doing a lot of drinking . . . . I was going through stuff,"
he explained. He was also carrying drugs for his personal use and a "knuckle
knife"--a set of brass knuckles with a knife attached--for protection. As is
common at Baltimore's public high schools, security was on high alert.  n241
[*2122]  In addition to the usual metal detectors, officers were on hand to
frisk the students. A female officer patted Lemuel down and found the drugs in
his pocket. According to Lemuel, the officer grabbed his scrotum and squeezed.
She allegedly told him, "You better not say nothing." As he remembers it, she
told him that, if he screamed, she would remove the drugs from his pocket
(perhaps simply taking them, or turning them in so that he would get into legal
trouble). Though tears welled in Lemuel's eyes, he stayed silent, and the
officer let him go. But he returned home swollen and in pain.  n242

   Despite those horrific recollections ("procedural injustice" seems too
clinical a word for bodily assault), there have been times when Lemuel has
wanted to call the police for help. When Lemuel was younger, someone from his
neighborhood robbed him and took his sports jersey, an item that was relatively
expensive given his financial background and thus had great significance to him.
He wished that he could call the police to report the crime and get the jersey
back, but instead he reluctantly fought the older boy who took it. "Got my ass
whipped. Got my jersey back, though." There have been other times when he has
wanted to call the police as well, times when an old-fashioned schoolyard brawl
would not be of much help. People have shot near him, and "things . . . was a
little bit out of my control." Yet he still did not call the police because
"it's never good." Lemuel's uncle is a police officer, but instead of making him
feel closer to the police, he thinks the job reflects poorly on his uncle's
character. Lemuel told us, chuckling, "Even my uncle, my uncle's an asshole. He
don't come to no family reunions or nothing."

   Lemuel does not think the problems of policing that he has experienced, and
that gave rise to the Freddie Gray unrest, are attributable to race. In his
view, the problems of police-community relations are problems of neighborhood
income inequality. "Black, white, Hispanic, it doesn't matter your race. It
matters where you live. It's almost--your income." Because Lemuel has committed
crimes in higher-income neighborhoods, he has seen firsthand that police
[*2123]  respond quickly in those areas. He and a friend attempted to burglarize
a home in a wealthier part of Baltimore County, and they assumed that because
the house was in a semirural area, it would take the police a long time to
arrive. They were wrong. Someone called the police, and officers arrived very
quickly. "When you're in another neighborhood, you get treated with more
respect. I realized that when I went to try to do my first home invasion. The
cop response was so quick . . . . It was so quick. I never seen the cops respond
to this neighborhood so quickly." Lemuel believes that slow police response is
inevitably part of the experience of living in "the projects," including trailer
parks.

   One distinction between the police in West Baltimore and the police where
Lemuel attempted the burglary is jurisdictional. West Baltimore, located within
Baltimore's city limits, is under the jurisdiction of the Baltimore City Police
Department. By contrast, outside the city limits in Baltimore County, the
Baltimore County Police Department handles policing. Assuming Lemuel's
experience is representative, the alleged discrepancy in response times could
come from the differences in policies and workloads between the city and the
county police departments. The differences between these jurisdictions might
relate to their relative emphases on responding to crime reactively versus
implementing preventive or proactive approaches. It might be the case that in
the county, the police department still places heavy emphasis on responding to
calls for service, while in the city (particularly in high crime areas), there
is greater emphasis on patrolling. These different approaches could explain city
residents' simultaneous sense that there is a heavy presence of police cars
n243 and delayed response to calls for service.  n244 More research is needed to
compare police response times  [*2124]  across and between jurisdictions, and to
locate the department-level policies and practices that might explain any undue
delay.

   Lemuel's earlier experiences of procedural injustice could also be
attributable not only to individual bad officers, but to policies and department
cultures that incentivize bad behavior. As noted above, Lemuel's most vivid
negative experiences were with the "knockers," the plainclothes police officers
who work in units that focus solely on violent crime and drug crime in
distressed Baltimore neighborhoods. These units, which have been called "flex
squads" in the past but are often renamed, are allowed broad discretion,
including whether they wear uniforms, whether they drive marked cars, where they
police (they are not limited to a post), and the hours they work.  n245 They
usually carry out drug raids as well. Although Baltimore's flex squads came
under fire in the mid-2000s due to deep corruption in the Southwest police
district's squad, including the rapes that Shawna fears,  n246 the squads now
exist with somewhat greater oversight. Yet some people--including former police
officers--claim that street enforcement units are still given wide discretion
that they often grievously misuse.  n247

   Arrest incentives, and the more general culture of arrest,  n248 might also
have contributed to experiences like Lemuel's. Although he reports being
arrested  [*2125]  only once (and not through an encounter with a "knocker"), it
is possible that police were more present in his neighborhood because they were
looking for people to arrest. (Perhaps because Lemuel was so young, police were
slower to arrest him.) While we do not have evidence of what those specific
officers believed, insider accounts suggest that department policy encouraged
greater police presence in predominantly poor and African American
neighborhoods, even for officers who were not assigned to those areas. Former
Baltimore police officer Michael Wood told reporters that, after getting a plum
assignment to an upper-middle-class, predominantly white neighborhood, he would
sometimes leave his post to go to a poor, predominantly black neighborhood to
make arrests. He needed to meet his expected number of arrests, but even though
there were people using drugs and committing other crimes in the neighborhood
where he was assigned, he knew there would be "trouble" if he arrested the wrong
person. So, even though it technically violated policy for Wood to patrol for
arrests outside of his post, his supervisors signed of on his work. "They knew
that judges and court officials lived in that neighborhood. If I locked up the
judge's 18-year-old son for drugs or whatever, things could get really bad for
me," Wood told reporters.  n249 Several scholars have described the perils of
arrest incentives, arguing that such policies have contributed to mass penal
control through misdemeanor arrests and noncarceral forms of state supervision.
n250 Lemuel's story and the Baltimore context suggest that incentives to arrest
might also simply bring more people into contact with aggressive policing. Even
if those people are never arrested, and even if they do not become suspects of
any particular crime, this contact might have negative effects on their
perceptions of police, reminding them of their relative worthlessness in the
eyes of the state. Consequently, arrest-incentivizing policies may serve to
deepen legal estrangement.

   On a broader scale, of course, structural exclusion through policing is
layered atop deeper structural disadvantages that arise in the contexts of
growing up poor and African American, and living in the city of Baltimore. Good
policing  [*2126]  is just one additional resource, or another form of capital,
n251 from which the law writ large may exclude people like Shawna, Justin,
Jamila, and Lemuel.

V. DISMANTLING ESTRANGEMENT

   How can police reform dismantle legal estrangement? There is little
scholarship that tackles this question in even a cursory way. Research suggests
that procedural justice can unsettle the psychological process that leads people
to perceive the police as illegitimate. Evidence also indicates that the
procedural justice solution can effectively increase perceptions of legitimacy
across race and, to some extent, class.  n252 Yet--other than the well-trodden
but hazy path of "community policing"  n253--there has been little discussion of
reforms that can disrupt the sociological process leading whole communities to
see the police as a symbol of their status on the social periphery. Measures
that emanate from legitimacy theory and the procedural justice approach, such as
police training, are ultimately an impoverished response to estrangement.  n254

   One might reasonably view legal estrangement not as a problem of policing,
but as a problem of concentrated poverty and racial inequality. Certainly, as is
apparent in the vignettes offered in this Essay, concentrated poverty and
[*2127]  systemic racial injustice are major structural problems that produce
legal estrangement. Fully dismantling legal estrangement will be impossible
without more fundamental shifts in economic distribution and eradication of
racial discrimination: the problems of policing that have motivated Black Lives
Matter are problems of America's broken opportunity structure.  n255 The root
causes of estrangement, similar to the root causes of crime and mass
incarceration, may seem inappropriate to address through the criminal justice
system.  n256

   Admittedly, the structural factors believed to contribute most fundamentally
to cynicism, such as concentrated poverty, segregation, and residential
instability,  n257 are not generally seen as the province of police practice and
policy. Yet to demand that curing poverty and eliminating race discrimination
are the only ways to meaningfully effect change in policing is to accept
paralysis. The "root causes" mentality encourages scholars and policymakers to
ignore ways that police practices and policy directly and actively contribute to
legal estrangement and its concomitant racial and socioeconomic conditions. For
instance, some scholars have argued that police practices directly contribute to
persistent residential segregation.  n258 Police contact can negatively
influence the prison reentry process, making it difficult for returning citizens
to maintain employment and familial relationships.  n259 Multiple experiences
with arrest of a parent can result in court dates for children that keep them
out of school and siphon them into the criminal justice apparatus; this process
interrupts their education and ultimately places them at risk for incarceration
and its related perils.  n260 Because  [*2128]  there has been insufficient
attention to legal estrangement in the regulation of policing, opportunities to
link the structural factors in estrangement with concrete reforms to policing
have been underexplored. The proposals here are not offered as a cure-all to
legal estrangement, but are instead an opening salvo to encourage police
reformers to dedicate energy toward new strategies and structures of police
governance.

A. Using Federal Tools To Change Local Practices

   Scholars often overlook many of the structural issues that confront policing
outside the purview of federal law because the policing crisis is embedded in
state and local laws and policies. Even though federal law and policy has
brought some uniformity to local policing through spending initiatives since the
1930s, police administrative rules and practices still vary intensely among
states, counties, and municipalities.  n261 In addition, there is rich debate
over the appropriate institutional actors that should regulate local police
behavior.  n262 Faced with disagreement over the depth of the solutions needed,
issues of federalism, and potentially limited institutional capacities, one
would be hard-pressed to find a legal silver bullet capable of resolving the
legal and social problems of policing.

   One tool that provides the federal government with leverage to force local
departments to change or eliminate structurally exclusive policies is section
14141 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, also known
as the Clinton Crime Bill.  n263 Section 14141 authorizes the U.S. Attorney
General to sue a local police department for engaging in a pattern or practice
of violating constitutional and legal rights. The Department of Justice (DOJ)
may use the threat of litigation to reach an agreement with the agency to pursue
specific reforms, or take the agency to court and mandate actions through a
consent decree. Although section 14141 has many merits--for example, the law
[*2129]  is credited with providing a path to successful long-term reform for
police departments in Cincinnati, Los Angeles, and Pittsburgh  n264 --many
scholars have offered an array of potential improvements to the law.  n265

   One of the biggest shortcomings of section 14141 is that its use is
politically cyclical.  n266 During the second term of President George W. Bush,
the DOJ did not enter into a single consent decree with a police agency, opting
instead to enter into nonbinding agreements with wayward departments.  n267 In
contrast, the Obama Administration has investigated dozens of departments.  n268
Even this figure is relatively small considering that there are more than 12,000
police departments across the United States; many scholars believe that the
costly and invasive nature of the process limits its capacity to reach the full
set of departments that may require oversight.  n269 One suspects that a Trump
DOJ will investigate very few, if any, police departments.

    [*2130]  Indeed, perhaps the major drawback of relying on § 14141 is that it
likely allows so much unlawful and procedurally unjust policing to go
undetected. Baltimore provides an excellent example of this issue. On August 10,
2016, the DOJ released a 163-page report lambasting the Baltimore Police
Department for its persistent violations of the rights of Baltimore's African
American population, emphasizing in particular the Department's mistreatment of
youth  n270 (such as the participants in the Hearing Their Voices study).  n271
The DOJ concluded that the Department's discriminatory practices violate Title
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Safe Streets Act of 1968.  n272 Yet
just sixteen months earlier, in May 2015, the Final Report of the President's
Task Force on Twenty-First Century Policing described Baltimore's efforts to
build community legitimacy. The Report summarized testimony from then-Police
Commissioner Anthony Batts touting the Department's establishment of a new
Professional Standards and Accountability Bureau "tasked with rooting out
corruption, holding officers accountable, and implementing national best
practices for polic[i]es and training."  n273 The DOJ Report, which denounces
the Department for its failure to properly train officers, does not even mention
this Bureau. In fact, the Report only briefly mentions the Baltimore Police
Department's other efforts to address its legacy of bias.  n274 It took the
death of Freddie Gray, and the corresponding public uproar, to push the DOJ to
commence this investigation and issue the Report. While section 14141 provides a
helpful backstop, it allows departments to maintain a veneer of community
orientation until a crisis strikes. Major pushes for structural reform should
not rely on litigation that is rarely initiated before tragedy occurs.

    [*2131]  While recognizing the inherent insufficiency of incremental
interventions as a full remedy for legal estrangement, in this Part, I
provisionally discuss Fourth Amendment jurisprudence and four areas of police
governance reform that could contribute to dismantling estrangement. These
reforms have garnered much less attention in the most recent police reform
debates than police training, community policing initiatives, or even structural
reform litigation. Whereas most scholarship on police regulation tends to focus
on constitutional criminal procedure,  n275 these reforms are aimed at statutory
and municipal law at the federal, state, and local levels. Unlike the legitimacy
approach, legal estrangement theory directly suggests structural reform: the
theory demands attention to group societal membership and the deep-seated laws,
policies, and structures that have produced the policing crisis. Microlevel
procedural justice reforms aimed at producing individual-level feelings of
legitimacy are anemic responses to legal estrangement.

B. Paying the Police

   The police wage system is a structural factor that functionally excludes many
poor people and African Americans from policing resources, thereby contributing
to legal estrangement. The wage structure under which police officers generally
operate works inversely to the way it should: some of the busiest and most
dangerous jobs in law enforcement often pay the least. Particularly in cities,
towns, and counties that are financially strapped, finding the means to retain
police-officer talent is a serious challenge. Moreover, officers are frequently
aware of localized pay disparities. For example, a journalistic report on St.
Louis County claimed that officers in some parts of the county were making
"poverty wages," as low as $ 10.50 per hour.  n276 The DOJ Ferguson consent
decree required that the city increase officer salaries as part of its
recruitment plan.  n277

    [*2132]  Low officer wages introduce two major perversions to the system.
First, when salaries are too low, the most skilled and experienced officers will
(rationally) leave higher-crime areas to work in easier areas where they are
paid more. Second, low wages mean that many officers feel pressure to pursue
large amounts of overtime hours and off-duty work, also known as secondary
employment or "moonlighting."  n278 Police officers typically receive a base
hourly wage, but many earn a significant amount of their take-home pay through
overtime. In Baltimore, for example, over one hundred officers in fiscal year
2013 earned more than $ 40,000 in overtime pay. In that year, the highest-paid
employee of the Baltimore City Police Department earned $ 110,00 in overtime pay
and $ 67,000 in base pay for a total of $ 177,000, more than the city's mayor
and more than the police commissioner.  n279 In 2015, six of the ten
highest-paid people in Baltimore city government were employees of the police
department.  n280 Only one of those employees, the police commissioner, had a
top-ten base salary. The others received substantial amounts of money in what
appears to be overtime pay.  n281

   The stress and burden of extended work hours can make even the most promising
officers terrible at their job.  n282 The President's Task Force report devotes
one of its six pillars to officer wellness and safety, with emphasis on mental
health.  n283 It stresses the riskiness and trauma of the job and blames officer
judgment errors on fatigue. It even discusses shift length as a potential
contributor  [*2133]  to officer fatigue.  n284 But the report does not directly
draw a link between fatigue, exposure to risk and trauma, long shifts, and
wage-related pressures and overwork, all factors that may affect economically
depressed jurisdictions more than other jurisdictions. Wage disparity is a
structural issue that occurs far upstream from the events that have catalyzed
the police reform movement. Bringing greater transparency and equity to officer
salaries will likely decrease procedural injustice and vicarious marginalization
on the ground, which could, over time, reduce legal estrangement.

   Even where officers are paid on the same scale within the same departments,
they still may be earning less to police tougher neighborhoods. Collective
bargaining means that departments are often bound to pay salary, assign shifts,
assign beats, and give promotions or transfers on the basis of seniority.  n285
And even where collective bargaining is not in place, decision making based on
seniority is often embedded into police culture. Seniority rules mean that new
patrol officers tend to get the least-desired assignments--graveyard shifts and
tough neighborhoods--while receiving the lowest compensation.  n286

   Although problems of police wage inequality and job insecurity are tied
partly to local governments' financial insolvency,  n287 federal intervention
could help bring balance between urban and suburban wages. Since the
establishment of the federal Office of Community Oriented Policing Services in
1994, federal funding has flowed to local departments to incentivize various
reforms.  n288 Federal funding, then, could partially close the gap between the
wages that local taxes can fund and the wages needed to attract the most skilled
officers to the highest-need areas. State legislation could help as well. In
Indiana, for example, legislators have proposed requiring the state's Office of
Management and Budget to prepare an annual report comparing the salaries of
state police with salaries in the three largest local police departments and to
make recommendations about wage parity.  n289 It is difficult to tell whether
such legislation will be effective, but this bill represents one way that states
could help reduce local wage disparity between officers.

    [*2134]  Another practice that allocates policing resources to wealthier
neighborhoods, to the detriment of poorer neighborhoods, is police departments'
practice of taking on secondary employment.  n290 Under secondary employment
arrangements, private entities such as sports teams or neighborhood associations
can pay the police department extra money to provide additional police services.
The DOJ has criticized such local government arrangements for "contribut[ing] to
inequitable policing."  n291 For example, when the DOJ first investigated the
New Orleans Police Department in 2011, some of its most significant criticism
fell upon the Department's Paid Detail program.  n292 Paid Detail gave officers
the opportunity to earn extra money by working overtime for private pay, and
most of the places they worked were the areas lowest in crime:


     The breadth and prevalence of the Detail system has essentially
     privatized officer overtime at NOPD, resulting in officers working
     Details in the areas of town with the least crime, while an
     insufficient number of officers are working in the areas of New
     Orleans with the greatest crime prevention needs. Those with means in
     New Orleans are essentially able to buy additional protection, while
     those without such means are unable to pay for the services and extra
     protection needed to make up for insufficient or ineffective policing
     . . . . While any community that wants extra security certainly has a
     right to pay for it, it raises troubling legal and ethical questions
     when that extra security might otherwise have been focused on parts of
     the City most in need of police assistance.  n293

   This language might have been a clarion call to municipal governments to
prohibit--or at least to regulate more effectively--the use of sworn police
officers as private security for overtime pay. However, perhaps because the
investigation  [*2135]  revealed such a massive number of issues, the Report's
critique of Paid Detail did not gain national traction.  n294 In addition, the
DOJ did not mention Paid Detail in its ultimate consent decree with the New
Orleans Police Department.  n295 Importantly, the Report's critique of Paid
Detail is not general: it does not state that officer "moonlighting" is per se
corrupt. It limits its analysis to the particularities of New Orleans, and even
suggests an acceptable alternative Paid Detail governance structure. Based on
that suggestion, local governments might do well to heed DOJ's call and
centralize requests for private employment of off-duty officers so that they can
better monitor the practice and use it to bring additional funds into their
police departments.  n296

Another option would be to bar sworn police officers from taking on this type of
secondary employment altogether. Instead, local governments could expect private
entities who want extra security to hire staff through private firms. Some
Seattle neighborhoods have instituted this approach.  n297 Yet there are reasons
to hesitate to take this path: private police do not have the same powers, nor
operate under the same constitutional constraints, that apply to sworn police
officers.  n298 Private security officers might be used only for neighborhood
observation and suspect tracking, but they need to contact public police to
conduct searches and arrests. In any event, finding a way to maintain a
public/private distinction in policing would solve the ethical problem of
allowing  [*2136]  the training, equipment, and culture that the public provides
to sworn police officers to directly reproduce neighborhood inequality.

   Secondary employment is thus a mechanism through which poorer communities are
structurally excluded from good policing. Officers may receive overtime pay for
working as officers in wealthier areas, while they only earn paltry wages to
keep distressed neighborhoods safe. This dynamic sends a stark message that
protecting wealthier areas is more lucrative than protecting higher-poverty
areas. Secondary employment policies like these might even suggest, at least
symbolically, that African American and poor lives truly lack value.

C. Reorganizing the Police

   There are more than twelve thousand police departments in the United States,
nearly half of which employ fewer than ten police officers.  n299 Even as
philosophies of policing have shifted dramatically over the past century,
governance structures of policing have largely remained intact.  n300
Consolidation of very small police districts might be another way to ameliorate
the structural exclusion from police resources that contributes to legal
estrangement. Although consolidating districts would not constitute a total
reorganization of departments, it might be a strong first step toward creating a
structure more amenable to meaningful community engagement and checks on police
power.

   The proliferation of many small police departments means that some
neighborhoods can essentially become individual fiefdoms for certain officers.
The issue of unchecked power in extremely small rural or suburban police
departments came to national attention for a very short time in late 2014, when
a South Carolina prosecutor attempted twice to win the conviction of Richard
Combs, the police chief and sole police officer in Eutawville, South Carolina--a
town with a population of 315. Combs was charged with murder for shooting
Bernard Bailey, a fifty-four-year-old unarmed African American man, in the
parking lot of Eutawville's town hall in May 2011. Bailey had intervened when
Combs issued a traffic ticket to Bailey's daughter, and the shooting allegedly
occurred a few days later when Combs attempted to serve Bailey with a warrant
for obstruction of justice. Some onlookers saw Combs as an example of an
[*2137]  officer who, because he functioned as the sole traffic officer, regular
patrol officer, and police chief, had unfettered power to use the machinery of
criminal justice for vindictive purposes--a structure that seems almost destined
to produce corrupt police action.  n301 Yet after the briefest of moments, as
Combs ultimately took a guilty plea for misconduct in office and as bigger-city
shootings took over news cycles again, the issue of small police department
governance returned to obscurity.  n302

   Small departments can also create various interjurisdictional inconsistencies
ranging from the amount of training officers receive to the equipment available
to keep themselves and civilians safe. For example, one of the arguments that
Combs's attorney made to explain his decision to shoot Bailey was that, because
the town he policed is very small, they did not have less lethal equipment such
as a "stun gun" (Taser) or pepper spray. This meant that the only means of force
he had available was his gun.  n303 Whether giving Combs a Taser or pepper spray
would have saved Bailey's life is a difficult question; however, it does seem
likely that, in part because of the governance structure of his department,
Combs did not have access to expensive Taser technology.

   Moreover, the prevalence of very small departments in close proximity to each
other increases the likelihood that an officer fired from one jurisdiction for
serious reasons could find work as an officer in another. Poor communities are
more likely to hire "gypsy cops," officers with spotty work histories who have
been fired elsewhere, because their resource constraints make it more difficult
for them to discriminate between good and bad officers.  n304 Again, the
officers least likely to conduct their work in a procedurally just manner are
siphoned toward poor communities.

    [*2138]  Some have claimed, in line with strong federalism advocates and
some basic tenets of public choice theory, that having more police agencies
within close proximity increases competition, which in turn could improve their
responsiveness to community needs and allow dissatisfied people to "vote with
their feet" by relocating elsewhere.  n305 Yet there is little evidence that
these benefits emerge from the existence of very small police departments that
lack meaningful external oversight, while there is some evidence that the
current extreme fragmentation is detrimental to the overall quality of policing.
n306

   Historically, one argument against department consolidation was that
administrative centralization could threaten officers' ability to engage in
community policing.  n307 However, it may not be empirically true that
fragmentation of police administration is correlated with, let alone a catalyst
of, effective community-oriented policing. Indeed, some of the most celebrated
efforts to link police and community have taken place in larger departments.
n308

   By contrast, the sheer volume of locally controlled police departments, all
of which have slightly different policies and issues, creates a major barrier to
systemic reform. The seemingly infinite variations on police policy means that
scholars and policymakers may observe common problems across local contexts but
find it difficult to sufficiently address those problems on a larger scale.
[*2139]  Consolidation would help if only because it would decrease the number
of departments and make it easier to gain a picture of their policies and
practices.

   Unlike many of the structural reforms proposed in this Part, department
consolidation has gained some support from advocates for money saving in
criminal justice. After the 2008 recession, municipal budgets shrank and many
officers were furloughed or laid off.  n309 Local executives are increasingly
considering police consolidation as a potential cost-effective structural
reform, and some departments have already consolidated as a way to cut
redundancies.  n310 Thus, consolidation could win the mutual support of fiscal
conservatives and liberals, building a coalition reminiscent of the left-right
nexus on cutting mass incarceration.  n311 However, significant hurdles could
impede such a reform. For one, members of the public who live in very small
towns may interpret consolidation of small departments as a cut to their public
safety and to local control of their police force. In addition, consolidation
would mean that some people who have immense power would be required to yield
it. These fundamental issues mean that securing support for department
consolidation in local areas will pose a significant challenge.

D. Raising the Stakes of Fourth Amendment Jurisprudence

   Understanding today's policing crisis as a problem of legal estrangement
clarifies and raises the stakes of our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence. When
judges rule on the lawfulness of police conduct in a single case, they are
ruling on a "program."  n312 That program is bigger than systematic Terry
stops-and-frisks of young African American and Latino men.  n313 The program is
endemic  [*2140]  to policing itself, including serving warrants  n314 and
responding (or not responding) to calls for assistance. Because of the
longstanding social, cultural, and symbolic meaning of the police among African
Americans and in racially and socioeconomically marginalized communities,
policing cases--more than others--send messages to groups about social inclusion
and, indeed, social citizenship. Legitimacy theory does not offer a consistent
mode of response to this problem.  n315

   What messages are conveyed in Fourth Amendment jurisprudence? Justice
Sotomayor's impassioned dissent in Strieff showed her understanding that this
case, even though it involved a white defendant, blessed police discretion to
behave in ways that denigrate and alienate minority populations. To illustrate,
we can return to the facts of Strieff.  n316 In Strieff, a narcotics detective,
Douglas Fackrell, conducted surveillance outside a home in southern Salt Lake
City, Utah, for about a week. Fackrell had received an anonymous tip that people
were selling and purchasing methamphetamine there. Fackrell saw several people
enter and leave the home after short periods of time--behavior that, in his
view, was consistent with drug dealing and purchasing. Edward Strieff was one of
the people who visited the home. On one of these surveillance days, Strieff left
the home in question and went to a nearby convenience store. Even though
Fackrell only knew that Strieff had visited the home--information that did not
amount to reasonable suspicion to justify a search--Fackrell followed Strieff to
[*2141]  the convenience store, stopped him, and questioned him about what he
was doing at the home in question. Fackrell also took Strieff's identification
card and shared his information with a police dispatcher. The dispatcher told
Fackrell that Strieff had an open warrant for his arrest on a minor traffic
violation. Fackrell then arrested Strieff, and in a search incident to arrest,
found the evidence he was looking for: Strieff was holding a small baggie of
meth and other drug paraphernalia.  n317

   Why is this case troubling? Fackrell violated the Fourth Amendment by
stopping Strieff in the first place; even the prosecutor conceded that point.
n318 Yet the Court ruled that because Fackrell learned that Strieff had an open
warrant for arrest--even if just for a minor traffic violation--the search he
conducted was sufficiently attenuated from the unconstitutional stop that the
evidence Fackrell discovered was admissible. In a world where few people had
open warrants, this decision might seem somewhat troubling, but not
catastrophic. Yet in a scenario where a substantial number of people have open
warrants, often for the most minor of infractions, often for noncriminal
violations of probation and parole conditions, and often because of their
poverty,  n319 the Strieff decision authorizes tremendous power. Police officers
are now free to arbitrarily (and even unconstitutionally) stop people, ask them
for their identification, have a dispatcher search their record, find an arrest
warrant for a long-unpaid parking ticket or a missed appointment with a
probation officer, and use that ticket as a reason to conduct any physical
search that they would like to conduct. If they find any contraband, that
contraband could be used as evidence in court. While police officers need
discretion in order to locate and deter crime, this ruling gives them a
worrisome amount of license. When one views this ruling in context and imagines
strategies like Fackrell's playing out in racially and socioeconomically
marginalized places like West Baltimore, one understands more clearly that the
Court has endorsed the wholesale exclusion of poor African Americans (and often
Latinx communities) from the protection of the law and from their rightful place
in society.

   In Whren v. United States, the Court ruled, inter alia, that challenges to
police investigations based on race-based selective enforcement must proceed
through Fourteenth Amendment equal protection analysis rather than Fourth
Amendment analysis.  n320 Given the very high bar for proving racial
discrimination  [*2142]  under the Equal Protection Clause post-Washington v.
Davis,  n321 Whren significantly curtails the degree to which Fourth Amendment
jurisprudence on police investigation could be used to correct racial
discrimination in the conduct of police investigations.

   Thus, state courts might under some circumstances be better suited than
federal courts to factor in the local context of racial discrimination and
disparity reflective of legal estrangement. For example, in late 2016, the
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruled in Commonwealth v. Warren that an
African American man's decision to flee from the police is not, on its own,
sufficiently probative of reasonable suspicion.  n322 The court partly based its
reasoning on statistical evidence that African American men in Boston
disproportionately experience stops based on racial profiling.  n323 Black male
Bostonians, the court cautioned, "might just as easily be motivated by the
desire to avoid the recurring indignity of being racially profiled as by the
desire to hide criminal activity."  n324 In other words, in an environment where
the police have signaled strongly to African American men that their group is
not a full part of society entitled to the presumption of innocence, the natural
response to that communication is to avoid the police, regardless of any
involvement in crime. This was a judicial acknowledgement of the potential
effects of legal estrangement.

   Judges who rule on the constitutionality of searches should keep in mind the
stakes of giving too much leeway to the police, stakes that legal estrangement
theory illuminates. Traditionally, we think of the potential harms of policing
gone awry as violations of privacy and individual dignity, and on the opposite
side, we weigh the police's ability to respond to and reduce crime.  n325 Yet as
important as individual privacy is, the collective stakes are even higher.
Moreover, some have argued that the text of the Fourth Amendment, emphasizing
reasonableness, demands that courts consider distributional outcomes of  [*2143]
searches and seizures by race, gender, and other group categories.  n326 The
question of reasonableness has grown obscure as Fourth Amendment jurisprudence
has come to focus so heavily on warrants, consent, probable cause, and so forth,
perhaps distracting courts from the fundamental reasonableness inquiry that
should take into account distributional concerns between groups.  n327 Getting
Fourth Amendment rulings wrong by giving the police too much power risks both
individual and collective membership in the American social order.

E. Democratizing the Police

   Legal estrangement demands a deep, meaningful approach to democratizing
police governance. Bringing about cohesion and solidarity between police and
African American and poor communities will require a more aggressive infusion of
deliberative participation in policing than most proposals demand. A legitimacy
approach might not object to deep democratization--these processes would
arguably make the police more effective in securing voluntary compliance and
would arguably encourage the police to use procedurally just methods--but
legitimacy would not require it.

   Barry Friedman and Maria Ponomarenko have recently argued against police
exceptionalism in policymaking. They propose that police policies, such as the
use of SWAT teams and warrantless searches, require legislative authorization,
administrative rulemaking with notice-and-comment, or some other democratic
process similar to other areas of regulation.  n328 While their argument is
persuasive, the communities most affected by legal estrangement are often locked
out of the democratic process more generally. For a panoply of reasons, ranging
from the education gap, to felony disenfranchisement and its chilling effects on
turnout in high-incarceration communities, to active efforts at voter
suppression, to gerrymandering, to the capture of policymaking through
high-stakes lobbying, African Americans--particularly if they live in
high-poverty communities--have relatively little say in who their
representatives are or in the legislation that their representatives ultimately
pass.  n329 The  [*2144]  public in general participates sparingly in
administrative rulemaking, and race-and class-distributed access gaps have long
been seen in that area of lawmaking as well.  n330 Shifting toward more
democratic processes is important on the grounds of democracy and the rule of
law, and it does provide an opening for meaningful change. However, it is
unlikely on its own to unsettle legal estrangement in the communities that are
most affected by it.  n331 Combining these processes with other
democracy-enhancing reforms might be necessary.

   Transparency measures, including data collection and "hot ticket" reforms
such as police officer body cameras, can also contribute to the overall
democratization of policing in a way that could begin to root out legal
estrangement.  n332 Currently, the most widely distributed videos that focus on
police generally show officers either engaging in forceful or other distasteful
behavior, or performing acts such as dancing, playing basketball, or
distributing ice cream. The former are unsettling because they emphasize police
wrongdoing rather than police officers' effective interactions with the public,
which are likely more common; the latter are unsettling because they suggest
such acts are core to today's iteration of "community policing." Data might
alert scholars and activists to overlooked systemic problems, but they could
also illuminate police agencies and officers that are doing their work properly.
If one suspects that most police interactions go the way that they should, data
and transparency can potentially be a boon to solidarity between officers and
communities. Data can perhaps put what police actually do most of the time in
clearer perspective.

    [*2145]  When then-State Senator Obama led the Illinois Legislature in
passing antiracial profiling legislation in 2003,  n333 he emphasized that the
purpose of the bill was to collect data on police activity. He convinced the
Fraternal Order of Police that the data would give them an opportunity to show
that they were doing valid police work, not engaging in racial discrimination.
n334 This initiative represents only one example of a transparency measure that
could serve both to root out estrangement and to provide a more informed
understanding of police. Yet perhaps an even more effective approach would
include ways to make policing more qualitatively transparent--for instance,
making videos of regular police work more publicly available, opening access to
police departments, and perhaps even finding ways to support more adversarial
forms of transparency and accountability, such as organized cop watching.  n335

   Reconciliation is a third type of democratic reform that the legal
estrangement perspective might suggest. Criminologist and activist David
Kennedy, along with leaders of the DOJ-funded National Initiative for Building
Community Trust and Justice, have proposed that police departments undertake a
"reconciliation" process between officers and historically distressed
communities.  n336 Although the specific mechanisms that would be officially
instituted are unclear, the proposed process would involve "a method of
facilitating frank engagements between minority communities, police, and other
authorities that allow them to address historical tensions, grievances, and
misconceptions, and reset relationships."  n337 The idea of reconciliation
builds on Kennedy's groundbreaking work as founder of Operation Ceasefire and
the National Network for Safe Communities (NNSC). Through these two
organizations, Kennedy and others engaged in a deep strategy of violence
prevention by working with local gangs and bringing those offenders together
with key stakeholders, including the police.  n338 The newly proposed
reconciliation efforts represent an effort to  [*2146]  scale up some of the
insights gained from these local violence-reduction interventions.

   The mechanics of this reconciliation proposal remain unclear. The proposal is
distinct from prevailing democratic reform recommendations because it takes very
seriously the historical roots of legal estrangement, accommodates the
complexity of the dynamics between officers and communities, and in some ways
meets the Habermasian ideal of a truly deliberative, consent-based approach to
policing. Taking full account of historical distrust is essential to the success
of cultural change, to avoid "merely replacing one modality of domination with
another."  n339

   However, governments usually use truth and reconciliation processes to
address injustices that occurred over a cognizable, bounded time period and
involved a fairly identifiable set of wrongdoers.  n340 To deal with the problem
of legal estrangement, a restorative reconciliation model would have to
recognize the deeply systemic nature of the problem. Moreover, NNSC's goal of
reducing violence is not the same as rooting out legal estrangement. A key
insight that drives the innovation in Operation Ceasefire and other programs is
that most of the violence in a community is concentrated within relatively
confined networks.  n341 Thus, deeply targeting those networks in a
deliberative, legitimacy-building way is a successful approach. Legal
estrangement, in contrast, is more dispersed and broadly influential. However,
the basic intuitions of reconciliation--intentionally bringing police and
communities together to build trust on a group level, and actively reckoning
with the collective memories of harsh policing--reflect the type of intensive,
deeply democratic process that might produce long-lasting cultural change.

    [*2147]  F. Shrinking & Refining the Footprint of the Police

   Finally, the legal estrangement perspective raises fundamental questions
about the role of police in society. Police--and more broadly, the criminal
justice system--have become the primary vehicle through which the state responds
to social deprivation.  n342 At times, police can play a positive role in
channeling resources to people who need them, particularly as a conduit into
diversion and decarceration programs that may, for example, help people get into
counseling and narcotics rehabilitation programs.  n343 Yet as a matter of
principle, routing rehabilitation and social services through the police could
perversely widen the carceral net and reify the "culture of control."  n344 The
expansion of policing control has added to police departments' coffers over the
past three decades, leading to the growth of many forces.  n345 Yet even police
officers complain that the system expects them to play an outsized role in poor
people's daily lives, performing functions that supplant work ideally done by
the welfare state and social services.  n346 This work--responding to mental
[*2148]  health crisis,  n347 truancy,  n348 homelessness,  n349 and more  n350
--is done by civil serv ants who are authorized to carry guns and use lethal
force.  n351 It is done by civil servants who, through the mechanisms of
self-selection,  n352 institutional culture,  n353 and perhaps more, may be more
punitive or less empathetic than the average civil servant.  n354

   The legal estrangement perspective should encourage serious reflection on
whether, and how much, armed officials should inhabit the role of social
caretaker. Recently, scholars and policymakers have pushed for a cultural shift
in policing, proposing that officers see themselves as "guardians" rather than
"warriors."  n355 While this work is commendable, it demands greater discussion
of the nature and scope of the guardianship that we should expect the police to
provide. It might be that reforms that enable greater collaboration between
police and social services could make the police more legitimate at an
individual level--but it might also, in the aggregate, worsen disparities in
criminal justice  [*2149]  treatment by race and class. This aggregate effect
would increase legal estrangement.

   Ultimately, the legal estrangement perspective demands a more holistic
discussion of institutional competence. A legitimacy analysis often examines
institutions in a decontextualized way, assessing whether a particular
institution (here, the police) has legitimacy or not. Legal estrangement
encourages a more relational examination of institutions. The frailty of one
bundle of institutions--here, the welfare state--might chip away at the
legitimacy of the police, of other institutions, and perhaps the state itself.
Shrinking the footprint of armed bureaucrats and creating a more robust system
of civil supports might bring more legitimacy to these institutions and increase
their capacity to produce social inclusion.

CONCLUSION

   This Essay argues that legal estrangement--a theory that focuses on the
symbolic and structural marginalization of African Americans and the poor from
society--provides richer theoretical grounding for police reform. Legal
estrangement theory incorporates procedural justice, a solution derived from
legitimacy theory, as a first step toward understanding police distrust among
African American and poor communities. Yet legal estrangement surpasses
legitimacy theory by fully considering two larger levels at which distrust
operates: vicarious marginalization and structural exclusion. Vicarious
experiences range from the mistreatment of a friend, as Jamila experienced, or
through learning about more distant negative treatment, as Shawna experienced
when she learned about the officer rapes. Structural aspects of policing--the
drug searches that happened at Lemuel's school, the "knockers" that he
encountered in his neighborhood, and the discretion to enforce questionable
walking ordinances against kids like Justin--exclude whole groups of people from
experiencing policing as a protective benefit and create a dividing line between
the valued and the valueless.

   Drawing on these theoretical insights, I have proposed a number of areas for
reform that, taken together, should help create the deep and lasting cultural
change that will be required to truly overcome legal estrangement. These reforms
range widely, including more technocratic reforms (restructuring police wages
and consolidating districts), judicial measures (rethinking Fourth Amendment
levels of interpretation), community-centered measures (democratization,
reconciliation, and transparency), and a fundamental revisitation of
institutional roles (shrinking and refining the police footprint while linking
it to a shoring up of critical social welfare institutions). These solutions
offer a deeper path forward than the legitimacy perspective does, pushing beyond
[*2150]  procedural justice. They do, of course, remain incomplete. The legal
estrangement perspective demands taking account of historically rooted group
marginalization and the collective consciousness of discrimination and
mistreatment. This historical and collective perspective is central to the
project of police reform. Accordingly, the perspective sensitizes police
reformers to the idea that, while modifications within the institution of
policing are critical and should move beyond individual line officers, their
work will not be finished until it spurs change in the full array of
institutions that perpetuate poverty, racecorrelated disadvantage, and symbolic
statelessness.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Criminal Law & ProcedureSearch & SeizureWarrantless SearchesStop &
FriskReasonable SuspicionGovernmentsCourtsJudgesGovernmentsLocal
GovernmentsPolice Power

FOOTNOTES:





n1  136 S. Ct. 2056, 2069-71 (2016) (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).





n2  See Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961); see also Rachel A. Harmon, Promoting
Civil Rights Through Proactive Policing Reform, 62 STAN. L. REV. 1, 10 & n.25
(2009) (describing limitations of the exclusionary rule).





n3  Strieff, 136 S. Ct. at 2071. For the content cited by Justice Sotomayor, see
MICHELLE ALEXANDER, THE NEW JIM CROW 124-26 (2010); JAMES BALDWIN, THE FIRE NEXT
TIME 19 (Modern Library 1995) (1962); TA-NEHISI COATES, BETWEEN THE WORLD AND ME
82-91 (2015); W.E.B. DU BOIS, The Souls of Black Folk, in WRITINGS 364-65
(Nathan Huggins ed., 1986) (1903) (describing double-consciousness) ; and MARIE
GOTTSCHALK, CAUGHT (2015). See also Tracey L. Meares & Tom R. Tyler, Justice
Sotomayor and the Jurisprudence of Procedural Justice, 123 YALE L.J. F. 525
(2014) (explaining how Justice Sotomayor's jurisprudence relates to social
science research on legitimacy theory).





n4  Strieff, 136 S. Ct. at 2069.





n5  Id.; cf. I DISSENT: GREAT OPPOSING OPINIONS IN LANDMARK SUPREME COURT CASES
98-99 (Mark Tushnet ed., 2008) (describing the rhetorical devices used by
Justice Brandeis in Whitney v. California) ; Lani Guinier, Foreword:
Demosprndence Through Dissent, 122 HARV. L. REV. 4 (2008) (arguing that oral
dissents provide an avenue for democratic communication to a public audience).





n6  PRESIDENT'S TASK FORCE ON 21ST CENTURY POLICING, FINAL REPORT OF THE
PRESIDENT'S TASK FORCE ON 21ST CENTURY POLICING 9-11 (2015) [hereinafter TASK
FORCE REPORT] .





n7  Id. at 9.





n8  See, e.g., id. at 11. Importantly, the empirical research that led to the
legitimacy findings treats legitimacy and trust as related but distinct topics.
For example, Tyler and Huo use legitimacy as an umbrella variable that includes
trust and confidence in police as one component of the broader concept. TOM R.
TYLER & YUEN J. Huo, TRUST IN THE LAW 108-11 (2002) ; see also Tom R. Tyler &
Jeffrey Fagan, Legitimacy and Cooperation: Why Do People Help the Police Fight
Crime in Their Communities?, 6 OHIO ST. J. CRIM. L. 231, 270-71 (2008)
(assessing police legitimacy using three factors, one of which is trust and
confidence).





n9  See infra Part I; see also TYLER & Huo, supra note 8, at 146-52 (presenting
the results of a study showing racial differences in perceptions of procedural
fairness) ; David S. Kirk & Andrew V. Papachristos, Cultural Mechanisms and the
Persistence of Neighborhood Violence, 116 AM. J. Soc. 1190, 1217 (2011) ; Robert
J. Sampson & Dawn Jeglum Bartusch, Legal Cynicism and (Subcultural?) Tolerance
of Deviance: The Neighborhood Context of Racial Differences, 32 LAW & SOC'Y REV.
777, 793 (1998); Jason Sunshine & Tom R. Tyler, The Role of Procedural Justice
and Legitimacy in Shaping Public Support for Policing, 37 LAW & SOC'Y REV. 513
(2003) (exploring the relationship between procedural fairness, police
legitimacy, and public support of the police).





n10  See, e.g., Sunshine & Tyler, supra note 9, at 526 ("Compliance was also
found to be influenced by ethnicity, income, and gender, with whites, the more
well off, and female respondents more likely to comply with the law . . . .") ;
Tom R. Tyler, Policing in Black and White: Ethnic Group Differences in Trust and
Confidence in the Police, 8 POLICE Q. 322, 333 (2005) ("White respondents
reported the highest level of cooperation in fighting crime, African Americans
the lowest... [I]nstitutional trust shaped cooperation among all groups . . .
."); Tom R. Tyler, Procedural Justice, Legitimacy, and the Effective Rule of Law
, 30 CRIME & JUST. 283, 294-95 (2003) [hereinafter Tyler, Procedural Justice] ("
[M] inority group members are less willing to accept the decisions of legal
authorities and less satisfied with those authorities with whom they deal...
[M]inority group members are less likely to accept decisions because they feel
unfairly treated.").





n11  E.g., Sunshine & Tyler, supra note 9, at 537; Tyler, Procedural Justice,
supra note 10, at 350.





n12  Consider, for example, the case of Antronie Scott, shot and killed on
February 4, 2016. When San Antonio police officer John Lee stopped Scott in
order to execute an arrest warrant, "Scott spun around quickly and the officer
feared for his life." Jacob Beltran & Mark D. Wilson, Man Wanted on Two Felony
Warrants, Shot Dead by Police, Was Unarmed, SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS (Feb. 5,
2016, 10:57 PM),
http://www.expressnews.com/news/local/article/Man-wanted-on-two-felony-warrants-
shot-dead-by-68o9709.php [http://perma.cc/962D-34M6].





n13  Consider, for example, the case of Charles Kinsey, shot and injured on July
18, 2016. Kinsey, a behavioral therapist who was working with an autistic adult,
was shot lying on his back, with his hands in the air. The facts surrounding the
case are complex. Officer Jonathan Aledda, who shot Kinsey, later claimed that
he was attempting to shoot the autistic Latino man with whom Kinsey was working;
the man was holding a toy gun that the original caller had suggested might be a
gun. However, several circumstances surrounding the incident weaken this
potential explanation. Charles Rabin, Charles Kinsey Was Shot Less Than Six
Minutes After Police Arrived, MIAMI HERALD (Aug. 5, 2016, 5:22 PM),
http://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/crime/article94009242.html
[http://perma.cc/Z9K6-NBU7]. In general, it is important to note that police
uses of force can be unreasonable, and thus punishable, even if the victims were
disobeying the law or failing to comply with officer commands. The test of
objective reasonableness in police excessive use of force cases depends on an
assessment of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the use of force at
issue, not simply whether the victim was breaking the law or disobeying the
officer at the time of the forceful act. See Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386,
388, 396-97 (1989).





n14  Consider, for example, the case of Eric Garner, who suffered a fatal heart
attack on July 17, 2014 after police attempted to arrest him for selling loose,
untaxed cigarettes. See Al Baker, J. David Goodman & Benjamin Mueller, Beyond
the Chokehold: The Path to Eric Garner's Death, N.Y. TIMES (June 13, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/14/nyregion/eric-garner-police-chokehold-staten-i
sland.html [http://perma.cc/57S7-2FYX]; Stephen L. Carter, Law Puts Us All in
Same Danger as Eric Garner, BLOOMBERG VIEW (Dec. 4, 2014, 10:56 AM),
http://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2014-12-04/law-puts-us-all-in-same-danger
-as-eric-garner [http://perma.cc/2X6Y-DJLB]; see also DOUGLAS HUSAK,
OVERCRIMINALIZATION: THE LIMITS OF THE CRIMINAL LAW 33-44 (2008) (analyzing the
differences between core and peripheral criminal offenses) ; William J. Stuntz,
Self-Defeating Crimes, 86 VA. L. REV. 1871, 1894 (2000) (describing legislative
incentives to criminalize specific behaviors at the urging of even a minority of
the population). One of the perils of broken-windows policing (also known as
order-maintenance or quality-of-life policing) is that its emphasis on enforcing
petty laws imbues the police with increased power and focus on social and racial
control, particularly in high-poverty, racially marginalized communities. See,
e.g., Robert J. Sampson, When Things Aren't What They Seem: Context and
Cognition in Appearance-Based Regulation, 125 HARV. L. REV. F. 97, 103-06
(2012). That officers enforce these laws at all likely decreases their
legitimacy. See Avani Mehta Sood, Cognitive Cleansing: Experimental Psychology
and the Exclusionary Rule, 103 GEO. L.J. 1543, 1582 (2015) (suggesting, using
experimental research, that unconstitutional police conduct had less effect on
people's assessments of police legitimacy when the police were intervening in
serious crime compared to when they were intervening in more minor crime).





n15  Criminal justice contact includes, but is not limited to, police stops,
arrests, generalized interaction between police and communities in heavily
policed neighborhoods, periods of incarceration, and periods of community
supervision (including probation and parole). For a general discussion of
criminal justice contact and surveillance, see, for example, Sarah Brayne,
Surveillance and System Avoidance: Criminal Justice Contact and Institutional
Attachment, 79 AM. SOC. REV. 367, 370, 373, 375 (2014).





n16  See, e.g., ALEXANDER, supra note 3, at 4 ("[M]ass incarceration in the
United States had . . . emerged as a stunningly comprehensive and well-disguised
system of racialized social control."); KATHERINE BECKETT & STEVE HERBERT,
BANISHED: THE NEW SOCIAL CONTROL IN URBAN AMERICA (2010) ; DAVID GARLAND, THE
CULTURE OF CONTROL: CRIME & SOCIAL ORDER IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY 75-92 (2001)
(arguing that a variety of social, economic, political, and cultural changes
arising in the late twentieth century led to changes in crime control, including
shifts in policing strategy) ; GOTTSCHALK, supra note 3, at 258 ; MICHAEL TONRY,
MALIGN NEGLECT: RACE, CRIME, & PUNISHMENT IN AMERICA 17-26 (1995) (debunking
claims that rising incarceration rates have reduced violent crime); BRUCE
WESTERN, PUNISHMENT & INEQUALITY IN AMERICA 4, 43-51 (2007) ("[T]he prison boom
was a political project that arose partly because of rising crime but also in
response to an upheaval in American race relations in the 1960s and the collapse
of urban labor markets for unskilled men in the 1970s.") ; Issa Kohler-Hausmann,
Managerial Justice and Mass Misdemeanors, 66 STAN. L. REV. 611, 630, 653-70
(2014); Tracey L. Meares, Programming Errors: Understanding the
Constitutionality of Stop-and-Frisk as a Program, Not an Incident, 82 U. CHI. L.
REV. 159, 162 (2015) ; Lo[#xEF]c Wacquant, Deadly Symbiosis: When Ghetto and
Prison Meet and Mesh, 3 PUNISHMENT & SOC'Y 95 (2001) (arguing that the
combination of "hyperghetto" and the prison is the current stage of "peculiar
institutions" designed to control African Americans, in the lineage of slavery
and Jim Crow); see also MICHEL FOUCAULT, DISCIPLINE & PUNISH 138-39 (Alan
Sheridan trans., 2d ed. 1995) (describing the process of "disciplinary coercion"
of human bodies through societal institutions, which include the prison).





n17  See TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6, at 51-60; see also id. at 17, 20-21,
34, 46 (describing training initiatives under each of the six pillars:
legitimacy, policy and oversight, technology and social media, community
policing and crime reduction, training and education, and officer wellness and
safety). Note that the training described under Pillar Six (officer safety and
wellness) is primarily safety training (e.g., training police officers to wear
seat belts and bulletproof vests), not procedural justice training. The key
point is that the Report leaves an overarching impression that solving the
problems facing twenty-first-century police is a matter of training frontline
officers, not restructuring and reimagining policing.





n18  See, e.g., Police Exec. Research Forum, U.S. DEP'T OF JUSTICE, Legitimacy
and Procedural Justice: A New Element of Police Leadership 2 (2014),
http://www.policeforum.org/assets/docs/Free_Online_Documents/Leadership/legitima
cy%2oand%2oprocedural%20justice%20-%2oa%2onew%2oelement%20of%2opolice%2oleadersh
ip.pdf [http://perma.cc/H85N-MXAJ] ("As today's police executives strive to
maintain the progress in reducing crime while serving as effective agents of
change, many are taking on a new challenge: applying the concepts of
'legitimacy' and 'procedural justice' as they apply to policing.") ; Local 12,
Implementing "Procedural Justice" Nationwide, YouTUBE (Dec. 19, 2014)
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PiO08U8RwF0 [http://perma.cc/HF4R-9CFD]; Mark
Sedevic, Procedural Justice & Police Legitimacy Training in Chicago: Reaping the
Benefits of the Golden Rule, 911 MAG.,
http://www.9-1-1magazine.com/Sedevic-Procedural-Justice-Training
[http://perma.cc/75L4-SDBG]; Ronal W. Serpas & Remi A. Braden, Reply to
Community Policing Revisited: Implementing the Principles of Procedural Justice
and Police Legitimacy, POLICE CHIEF (Mar. 2016),
http://www.policechiefmagazine.org/ideas-insights-reply-to-community-policing-re
visited-implementing-the-principles-of-procedural-justice-and-police-legitimacy
[http://perma.cc/9VYP-85T5] ("Integrating the principles of procedural justice
and police legitimacy throughout policing is the answer to [community policing]
problems. They form the basis for the core service delivery model that must be
used in every citizen encounter to build the support and cooperation necessary
to implement community policing more completely throughout the United States."
(footnote omitted)).





n19  See, e.g., DANIELA GILBERT, STEWART WAKELING & VAUGHN CRANDALL, PROCEDURAL
JUSTICE AND POLICE LEGITIMACY: USING TRAINING AS A FOUNDATION FOR STRENGTHENING
COMMUNITY-POLICE RELATIONSHIPS 8-10 (2015) (describing the adoption of
procedural justice training in three California cities -- Oakland, Salinas, and
Stockton); Wesley G. Skogan, Maarten Van Craen & Cari Hennessy, Training Police
for Procedural Justice, 11 J. EXPERIMENTAL CRIMINOLOGY 319 (2015) (describing
the Chicago training) ; Karim Shamsi-Basha, Birmingham Community Service Officer
Heather Campbell Offers Plenty of Compassion, Courtesy, BIRMINGHAM TIMES (July
28, 2016),
http://www.birminghamtimes.com/2016/07/birmingham-community-service-officer-heat
her-campbell-offers-plenty-of-compassion-courtesy/ [http://perma.cc/Q8XQ-TXVR]
(quoting Birmingham Police Chief A.C. Roper as saying, "We just went through 16
hours of procedural justice ... That talks about day-to-day interactions and
learning how to be neutral and how to listen to people.").





n20  See, e.g., United States v. City of Cleveland, No. 1:15CV1046, at 10-11
(N.D. Ohio May 25, 2016); Consent Decree at 73-74, United States v. City of
Ferguson, No. 4:16-cv-00180-CDP (E.D. Mo. Mar. 17, 2016).





n21  Sedevic, supra note 18 ("Procedural justice and police legitimacy [are] as
basic as the old adage, 'It is not what you say, but how you say it. It is not
what you do, but how you are doing it.' Procedural justice and legitimacy in law
enforcement is not just a strategy, but a movement ... It is about doing the
right thing all of the time and treating others how you would want to be
treated.").





n22  See, e.g., Brandis Friedman, Chicago Police Department Ramps Up Training
for 'Police Legitimacy,' CHI. TONIGHT (Jan. 17, 2017),
http://chicagotonight.wttw.com/2017/01/17/chicago-police-department-ramps-traini
ng-police-legitimacy [http://perma.cc/RYA6-AJGT] ; Kurt Rivera, Stockton Police
Strive for More 'Respectful' Department, ABC10.COM,
http://www.abc10.com/news/local/stockton/stockton-police-strive-for-more-respect
ful-department/386917388 [http://perma.cc/66JS-23H9] (describing Stockton's
adoption of a three-year strategic plan on procedural justice shortly before
Trump's inauguration).





n23  See Donald J. Trump, 2016 Presidential Candidate Questionnaire, INT'L ASS'N
CHIEFS POLICE (Aug. 20, 2016),
http://www.theiacp.Org/Portals/o/documents/pdfs/TrumpResponseFinal.pdf
[http://perma.cc/5YKJ-NJN5].





n24  Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), TWITTER (Jan. 24, 2017, 9:25 PM),
http://twitterxom/realDonaldTrump/status/824080766288228352
[http://perma.cc/RWE6-WWCQ].





n25  See, e.g., ERIC T. SCHNEIDERMAN, A REPORT ON ARRESTS ARISING FROM THE NEW
YORK CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT'S STOP-AND-FRISK PRACTICES 4 (2013) ; John
MacDonald, Jeffrey Fagan & Amanda Geller, The Effects of Local Police Surges on
Crime and Arrests in New York City, 11 PLoS ONE (2016); see also Max
Ehrenfreund, Donald Trump Claims New York's Stop-and-Frisk Policy Reduced Crime.
The Data Disagree, WASH. POST (Sept. 22, 2016),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/09/22/donald-trump-claims-new-yo
rks-stop-and-frisk-policy-reduced-crime-the-data-disagree
[http://perma.cc/N7NY-KGXH].





n26  See Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540 (S.D.N.Y. 2013).





n27  392 U.S. 1, 27 (1968) (describing the type of factual analysis an officer
must conduct to justify suspicion for a stop-and-frisk).





n28  Alexander Bolton, Trump Team Prepares Dramatic Cuts, HILL (Jan. 19, 2017),
http://thehill.com/policy/finance/314991-trump-team-prepares-dramatic-cuts
[http://perma.cc/HK77-FPGN].





n29  See John J. Donohue III & Jens Ludwig, More COPS, BROOKINGS POL'Y BRIEF 3
(Mar. 2007) ("COPS increased the total number of police officers on the street
in the peak year of 2000 by 11,900 officers, equal to around 2 percent of the
total police force in the country that year.").





n30  Presidential Executive Order on a Task Force on Crime Reduction and Public
Safety, WHITE HOUSE (Feb. 9, 2017),
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/02/09/presidential-executive-ord
er-task-force-crime-reduction-and-public [http://perma.cc/K98A-6VDM].





n31  Presidential Executive Order on Preventing Violence Against Federal, State,
Tribal, and Local Law Enforcement Officers, WHITE HOUSE (Feb. 9, 2017),
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/02/09/presidential-executive-ord
er-preventing-violence-against-federal-state [http://perma.cc/QS39-X6SM].





n32  See John Fritze, Jeff Sessions Voices Concern About Use of Consent Decrees
for Police, BALT. SUN (Jan. 10, 2017),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-jefF-sessions-voices
concern-about-use-of-consent-decrees-for-police-20170110-story.html
[http://perma.cc/2V9G-WP5J].





n33  See Police Exec. Research Forum, CIVIL RIGHTS INVESTIGATIONS OF LOCAL
POLICE: LESSONS LEARNED 4 (2013) ; see also infra notes 261-264 and accompanying
text.





n34  Shibani Mahtani, Community Policing Program Faces Uncertainty Under Donald
Trump Administration, WALL ST. J. (Nov. 30, 2016),
http://www.wsj.com/articles/community-policing-program-faces-uncertainty-under-d
onald-trump-administration-1480518002 [http://perma.cc/KF6B-AAZ6].





n35  See, e.g., Samuel Walker, Why Police Reform Won't Die Under Trump, CRIME
REP. (Nov. 28, 2016),
http://thecrimereport.org/2016/11/28/why-police-reform-wont-end-with-the-trump-a
dministration [http://perma.cc/H9XM-DZM3].





n36  See, e.g., George L. Kelling & James Q. Wilson, Broken Windows: The Police
and Neighborhood Safety, ATLANTIC (Mar. 1982),
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/304465
[http://perma.cc/E454-KWSW].





n37  WESLEY G. SKOGAN & SUSAN M. HARTNETT, COMMUNITY POLICING, CHICAGO STYLE 10
(1999) ("Interest in community policing has also been encouraged by the
emergence of a cadre of well-educated and sophisticated administrators at the
top of prominent police departments ... They have been impressed by two decades
of research on policing, which has highlighted some of the limitations of the
way in which it traditionally has been organized.").





n38  See, e.g., Anthony A. Braga, Andrew V. Papachristos & David M. Hureau, The
Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: An Updated Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis, 31 JUST. Q. 633 (2014).





n39  See, e.g., Walter L. Perry et al., Predictive Policing: The Role of Crime
Forecasting in Law Enforcement Operations, RAND CORP. 3-6 (2013),
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffilesi/nij/grants/243830.pdf [http://perma.cc/5LM5-C5JY]
(describing the origins of predictive policing, which partly derived from a
growing interest in crime prediction among quantitative criminologists over the
past forty years).





n40  Utah v. Strieff, 136 S. Ct. 2056, 2069-71 (2016) (Sotomayor, J.,
dissenting).





n41  Sampson & Bartusch, supra note 9, at 778.





n42  E.g., Monica C. Bell, Situational Trust: How Disadvantaged Mothers
Reconceive Legal Cynicism, 50 LAW & SOC'Y REV. 314 (2016); Jacinta M. Gau,
Procedural Justice, Police Legitimacy, and Legal Cynicism: A Test for Mediation
Effects, 16 POLICE PRAC. & RES. 402 (2015); David S. Kirk, Prisoner Reentry and
the Reproduction of Legal Cynicism, 63 Soc. PROBS. 222 (2016).





n43  Kirk & Papachristos, supra note 9, at 1191.





n44  E.g., Tom R. Tyler & Justin Sevier, How Do the Courts Create Popular
Legitimacy?: The Role of Establishing the Truth, Punishing Justly, and/or Acting
Through Just Procedures, 77 ALB. L. REV. 1095, 1129-30 (2014) (arguing that
signaling inclusion is a pathway for legal authorities to get people to comply
and cooperate with the law) ; see also TYLER & Huo, supra note 8, at xiii. This
difference arises not because legitimacy scholars disregard the intrinsic value
of inclusion and cohesion, but because those ends are not their outcome (or
independent variables) of interest. Notably, even when this scholarship does
discuss inclusion, it does so more from an individualized identity-based
framework than a collective one. See, e.g., Tom R. Tyler & Allen E. Lind, A
Relational Model of Authority in Groups, 25 ADVANCES EXPERIMENTAL Soc. PYSCHOL.
115, 139, 142 (1992) (describing the "group-value model of procedural justice,"
which theorizes the consequences of treatment by authority figures on people's
sense of their own status within a group, or within society, and their "feelings
of self-worth"). Group-value theory provides an account of how procedural
justice contributes to an individual's sense of belongingness within a group. It
does not give an account of groups' sense of be-longingness within society.
Because group-sense (culture) cannot be understood merely as an aggregation of
individual perceptions, these analyses are different in kind, not mere
differences in scale.





n45  See Tom R. Tyler et al., The Impact of Psychological Science on Policing in
the United States: Procedural Justice, Legitimacy, and Effective Law Enforcement
, 16 PSYCHOL. SCI. PUB. INT. 75 (2015).





n46  See ALDON MORRIS, THE SCHOLAR DENIED: W.E.B. DU BOIS AND THE BIRTH OF
MODERN SOCIOLOGY 75, 191, 220-21 (2015) (describing the pioneering scholarship
of the "Du Bois-Atlanta school" of sociology).





n47  W.E. Burghardt Du Bois, Preface to SOME NOTES ON NEGRO CRIME: PARTICULARLY
IN GEORGIA, at v, v (W. E. Burghardt Du Bois ed., 1904)
http://scua.library.umass.edu/digital/dubois/duboisg.pdf
[http://perma.cc/2H78-DHBZ].





n48  Id. at 40, 43-48.





n49  Id. at 65. In earlier work, Du Bois had been somewhat hesitant to draw a
link between objectively unfair criminal justice practices and African
Americans' perceptions of criminal injustice. See W.E.B. DU BOIS, THE
PHILADELPHIA NEGRO: A SOCIAL STUDY 175 (Henry Louis Gates, Jr. ed., 2007) (1899)
("It has been charged by some Negroes that color prejudice plays some part, but
there is no tangible proof of this, save perhaps that there is apt to be a
certain presumption of guilt when a Negro is accused, on the part of police,
public and judge.").





n50  DU BOIS, SOME NOTES ON NEGRO CRIME : PARTICULARLY IN GEORGIA, supra note
47, at 65.





n51  Nat'l Advisory Comm'n on Civil Disorders, Report of the National Advisory
Commission on Civil Disorders, NAT'L CRIM. JUST. REF. SERV. 19 (1968)
[hereinafter Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders]
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/Digitization/8073NCJRS.pdf
[http://perma.cc/75NB-BTNG].





n52  Id. at 5.





n53  Id. at 157; see also Stephen J. Schulhofer, Tom R. Tyler & Aziz Z. Huq,
American Policing at a Crossroads: Unsustainable Policies and the Procedural
Justice Alternative, 101 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 335, 342-43 (2011)
(explaining that in recent years, police officers' "preference for toughness"
was believed to be harmonious with order-maintenance policing models, thereby
serving positive ends for urban communities).





n54  See, e.g., MARILYNN S. JOHNSON, STREET JUSTICE: A HISTORY OF POLICE
VIOLENCE IN NEW YORK CITY (2003); KHALIL GIBRAN MUHAMMAD, THE CONDEMNATION OF
BLACKNESS 232-40 (2010).





n55  E.g., Alexandra Natapoff, Underenforcement, 75 FORDHAM L. REV. 1715,
1718-19 (2006). It is interesting to note that the underlying logic for harshly
present policing even then -- well before the philosophical turn in policing
toward "community policing" and broken-windows policing, and shortly before the
earliest years of the War on Drugs -- was that heavy presence and harshness were
necessary to reduce crime. See Kelling & Wilson, supra note 36 (explaining the
broken-windows theory of policing, also known as order-maintenance or
quality-of-life policing). The frayed relationship between African Americans and
law enforcement was deeply entrenched well before the War on Drugs. Mass
incarceration increased in part due to the War, but the issue of racialized
policing has much deeper roots. Cf. WESTERN, supra note 16, at 58 (crediting,
partially, the rise of mass incarceration to shifts in the punishment of
narcotics crimes).





n56  John Hagan & Celesta Albonetti, Race, Class, and the Perception of Criminal
Injustice in America, 88 AM. J. SOC. 329,343 (1982).





n57  Tracey L. Meares, Charting Race and Class Differences in Attitudes Toward
Drug Legalization and Law Enforcement: Lessons for Federal Criminal Law, 1
BUFFALO CRIM. L. REV. 137, 140, 142, 144-45 (1997) (drawing on data from the
1987 General Social Survey); see also Richard R.W. Brooks, Fear and Fairness in
the City: Criminal Enforcement and Perceptions of Fairness in Minority
Communities, 73 S. CAL. L. REV. 1219, 1228-29 (2000) ("[W]hile blacks are more
likely than the general population to view police brutality and harassment as a
problem, they are also much more likely to perceive crime as a serious problem.
Thus blacks suffer from a 'dual frustration' -- being fearful of both the police
and criminals." (footnotes omitted)).





n58  Lawrence D. Bobo & Victor Thompson, Unfair by Design: The War on Drugs,
Race, and the Legitimacy of the Criminal Justice System, 73 SOC. RES. 445, 456
(2006).





n59  See, e.g., Roland G. Fryer, Jr., An Empirical Analysis of Racial
Differences in Police Use of Force 35 (Nat'l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working
Paper No. 22399, 2006), http://www.nber.org/papers/w22399
[http://perma.cc/37MZ-3FYV] (finding that police in the cities studied were much
more likely to use nonlethal force, such as pepper spray or batons, when dealing
with blacks and Hispanics, but finding no evidence of racial disparity in their
use of lethal force); CAMPAIGN ZERO, http://www.joincampaignzero.org
[http://perma.cc/Q5XM-EUBN].





n60  E.g., CHARLES R. EPP, STEVEN MAYNARD-MOODY & DONALD HAIDER-MARKEL, PULLED
OVER: HOW POLICE STOPS DEFINE RACE AND CITIZENSHIP 135-36 (2014).





n61  See, e.g., JOHNSON supra, note 54; MUHAMMAD supra, note 54, at 232-40.





n62  Cf. Schulhofer, Tyler & Huq, supra note 53, at 341 (identifying an
analogous failure of the academic community to articulate the meaning of police
legitimacy).





n63  This literature is very extensive and cannot be fully cited here, but some
foundational works in the development of a sociological perspective on trust are
critical to note. See, e.g., JAMES S. COLEMAN, FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL THEORY
91-116 (1990); S.N. EISENSTADT, POWER, TRUST AND MEANING: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGICAL
THEORY AND ANALYSIS 14-16, 311-14 (1995); ANTHONY GIDDENS, THE CONSEQUENCES OF
MODERNITY 26-36 (1990); NIKLAS LUHMANN, TRUST AND POWER (John Wiley & Sons 1979)
(1973); GEORG SIMMEL, THE PHILOSOPHY OF MONEY 178-79 (Tom Bottomore & David
Frisby trans., 1978).





n64  Tom R. Tyler, Trust in the Twenty-First Century, in INTERDISCIPLINARY
PERSPECTIVES ON TRUST: TOWARDS THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL INTEGRATION 203,
204 (Ellie Shockley et al. eds., 2016).





n65  TYLER & HUO, supra note 8, at xiv.





n66  Id. at 108-09. But see Kirk & Papachristos, supra note 9, at 1207 & n.13
(focusing more narrowly on cynicism towards the legal system, as opposed to
cynicism more broadly). Tyler and Huo's conception and operationalization of
cynicism about the law bears only a tenuous relationship to how sociologists
conceive of and measure legal cynicism, and instead focuses on the degree to
which people see themselves as "against the law" rather than more deeply
alienated from it. See TYLER & HUO, supra note 8, at 104-05 ("Certainly, people
with this orientation feel little responsibility or obligation to obey the law
voluntarily").





n67  TYLER & HUO, supra note 8, at 108-09. Although obligation to obey the law
is only one component of legitimacy surveys, that component supersedes the
others in part because of the conceptual definition of legitimacy. Tyler usually
incorporates the idea of trust into the concepts of "motive-based trust," or,
alternatively, "normative alignment." Motive-based trust is the degree to which
people believe the police have positive, trustworthy motives. Id. at 59.
Normative alignment is a slightly different concept, and focuses on the degree
to which people believe the police share their values. Tom R. Tyler, Jonathan
Jackson & Avital Mentovich, The Consequences of Being an Object of Suspicion:
Potential Pitfalls of Proactive Police Contact, 12 J. EMPIRICAL LEGAL STUD. 602,
620 (2015). This literature has also, alternatively, conceived of legitimacy as
a form of institutional trust in the government. Id. at 602, 620-21 (describing
how the authors operationalized police normative alignment and trust in police
motives in their survey).





n68  For a targeted review of links among race, poverty, and trust, see Sandra
Susan Smith, Race and Trust, 36 ANN. REV. SOC. 453 (2010).





n69  Tyler & Fagan, supra note 8, at 235.





n70  See TYLER & HUO, supra note 8; see also Josh Bowers & Paul H. Robinson,
Perceptions of Fairness and Justice: The Shared Aims and Occasional Conflicts of
Legitimacy and Moral Credibility, 47 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 211, 278 n.310 (2012)
(pointing out that in Tyler's earlier work, the moral credibility of the system
had more weight than legitimacy of the system in determining people's reported
willingness to comply with the law); Michael D. Reisig, Jason Bratton & Marc G.
Gertz, The Construct Validity and Refinement of Process-Based Policing Measures,
34 CRIM. JUST. & BEHAV. 1005, 1024 (2007) (confirming the link between
procedural justice and legitimacy but also finding, inter alia, that trust in
the police and perceived distributive fairness of outcomes were predictive of
compliance and cooperation with law enforcement).





n71  E.g., Lorraine Mazerolle et al., Shaping Citizen Perceptions of Police
Legitimacy: A Randomized Field Trial of Procedural Justice, 51 CRIMINOLOGY 33,
40-41 (2013).





n72  See John Thibaut et al., Procedural Justice as Fairness, 26 STAN. L. REV.
1271 (1974); John Thibaut & Laurens Walker, A Theory of Procedure, 66 CALIF. L.
REV. 541 (1978).





n73  See, e.g., RICHARD H. FALLON, JR., LAW AND LEGITIMACY IN THE SUPREME COURT
(forthcoming) (chapter 1, manuscript at 3) (on file with author); Richard H.
Fallon, Jr., Legitimacy and the Constitution, 118 HARV. L. REV. 1787, 1795-1801
(2005) [hereinafter Fallon, Legitimacy and the Constitution]; Alan Hyde, The
Concept of Legitimation in the Sociology of Law, 1983 WIS. L. REV. 379; see also
Aditi Bagchi, Intention, Torture, and the Concept of State Crime, 114 PENN. ST.
L. REV. 1, 23-25 (2009) (applying these concepts to illuminate a practical legal
problem).





n74  See Tyler & Fagan, supra note 8, at 239; cf. DAVID BEETHAM, THE
LEGITIMATION OF POWER 24 (2d ed. 2013) (describing the author's "conviction that
it is necessary for social science to be freed from the whole Weberian legacy if
it is to make sense of the subject of legitimacy").





n75  See Beetham, supra note 74, at 24-25; Fallon, Legitimacy and the
Constitution, supra note 73, at 1795.





n76  Ideal types can be roughly understood as archetypes or categories. See MAX
WEBER, THE METHODOLOGY OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES 90 (Edward A. Shils & Henry A.
Finch eds. & trans., 1949); see also Kohler-Hausmann, supra note 16, at 623 &
n.24.





n77  1 MAX WEBER, ECONOMY & SOCIETY: AN OUTLINE OF INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY 215-16
(Guenther Roth & Claus Wittich eds., Ephraim Fischoff et al. trans., 1978); see
also Duncan Kennedy, The Disenchantment of Logically Formal Legal Rationality,
or Max Weber's Sociology in the Genealogy of the Contemporary Mode of Western
Legal Thought, 55 HASTINGS L.J. 1031, 1037-44 (2004) (describing the "basic
ideal typical categories Weber used in constructing his sociology of law").





n78  See ANTHONY T. KRONMAN, MAX WEBER 96-117 (1983). For Weber, legitimacy was
a sociological concept about the nature of the populace's belief in a given
authority rather than a moral status, but one can perceive some slippage in
Weber's work on this point between the sociological and the normative. See
generally BEETHAM, supra note 74, at 7-8 (comparing political philosophy and
social scientific ideas of legitimacy); Fallon, Legitimacy and the Constitution,
supra note 73, at 1795-1801 (comparing sociological legitimacy with moral
legitimacy).





n79  See Robert M. Cover, Violence and the Word, 95 YALE L.J. 1601, 1607-08
(1986) (explaining the connection between law as state power and violence).





n80  As opposed to the institutional realm, which might focus on other
authorities such as the church, the university, the corporation, and so forth.





n81  BEETHAM, supra note 74, at 8-10 (describing the distinctions between moral
and social scientific conceptions of legitimacy).





n82  Id. at 20 (" [L]egitimacy is ... a set of distinct criteria, or multiple
dimensions, operating at different levels, each of which provides moral grounds
for compliance or cooperation on the part of those subordinate to a given power
relation.").





n83  See J[#xDC]RGEN HABERMAS, BETWEEN FACTS AND NORMS: CONTRIBUTIONS TO A
DISCOURSE THEORY OF LAW AND DEMOCRACY 222-37 (William Rehg trans., 1996). Of
course, by this metric, little about policing in racially and socioeconomically
isolated neighborhoods could be seen as legitimate given that police governance
is rarely subjected to dialogue or even to public process. Barry Friedman &
Maria Ponomarenko, Democratic Policing, 90 N.Y.U. L. REV. 1827, 1835 (2015)
("[P]olicing suffers from a failure of democratic accountability, of policy
rationality, of transparency, and of oversight that would never be tolerated for
any other agency of executive government."); see also DAVID ALAN SKLANSKY,
DEMOCRACY AND THE POLICE 13-58 (2008) (describing democratic pluralist
approaches to police governance). Indeed, many police officials and unions,
today and in the past, view the involvement of civilians in police governance as
counterproductive to the work of crime response and deterrence. Thus, various
measures have been taken to curtail their power. See generally SAMUEL WALKER,
POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY: THE ROLE OF CITIZEN OVERSIGHT (2001) (describing attempts
to introduce civilian oversight to various city police departments); David Alan
Sklansky, Police and Democracy, 103 MICH. L. REV. 1699 (2005) (describing
setbacks for civilian review boards in several cities). In a recent debate over
a set of extensive police reforms in Maryland, civilian membership on police
accountability boards was reportedly the primary sticking point between the
police union and reform advocates. Ovetta Wiggins, Sweeping Maryland Police
Reform Measure Hits Stumbling Block, WASH. POST (Apr. 5, 2016),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/sweeping-maryland-police-reform-
measure-hits-stumbling-block/2016/04/05/e5aob2dc-fada-ne5-886f-ao37dba38301_stor
y.html [http://perma.cc/2A54-FQG6]. Ultimately, the reform act passed and went
into effect with its original language mandating civilian involvement in police
accountability removed, leaving it to individual jurisdictions to decide whether
to include civilians in reviewing police misconduct complaints. Justin Fenton,
Citizens to Gain Peek at Police Discipline, but Not Full View, BALT. SUN (Apr.
17, 2016),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/bs-md-police-accountability-bill
s-20160417-story.html [http://perma.cc/7LDG-DP9Q].





n84  See 1 ANTONIO GRAMSCI, PRISON NOTEBOOKS 137 (Joseph A. Buttigieg trans.,
Columbia Univ. Press 1992) (1948).





n85  See, e.g., TOM R. TYLER, WHY PEOPLE OBEY THE LAW 19-27 (1990) (orienting
this application of legitimacy theoretically); Tyler & Huo, supra note 8, at 102
(explaining the importance of self-regulation and internalized obligation to
defer to the law); Tom R. Tyler & Cheryl J. Wakslak, Profiling and Police
Legitimacy: Procedural Justice, Attributions of Motive, and Acceptance of Police
Authority, 42 CRIMINOLOGY 253, 254-55 (2004) (describing the public's view of
police legitimacy in the context of racial profiling).





n86  See, e.g., TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6, at 1-2; Rich (Skip) Miller, The
Importance of Procedural Justice, COMMUNITY POLICING DISPATCH (Sept. 2013),
http://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/o9-2013/the_importance_of_procedural_justice
.asp [http://perma.cc/M6S7-96TH] (describing procedural justice implementation
in the Sioux Falls, South Dakota police department and encouraging other
departments to take a similar approach, explaining, "If the community views
their officers as being legitimate they are more likely to comply with the law.
They are also more likely to agree with police decisions and less likely to be
confrontational or hostile toward us.").





n87  See, e.g., Schulhofer, Tyler & Huq, supra note 53, at 374; Tom R Tyler,
Multiculturalism and the Willingness of Citizens To Defer to Law and to Legal
Authorities, 25 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 983, 999 (2000) ("Demographic characteristics
such as ethnicity and gender do not affect the relative importance of procedural
justice concerns in determining procedural preferences -- everyone cares about
procedural justice."); Tom R. Tyler, What Is Procedural Justice?: Criteria Used
by Citizens To Assess the Fairness of Legal Procedures, 22 LAW & SOC'Y REV. 103,
125 (1988).





n88  See, e.g., Tom R Tyler, Policing in Black and White: Ethnic Group
Differences in Trust and Confidence in the Police, 8 POLICE Q. 322 (2005).





n89  See Josh Bowers & Paul H. Robinson, Perceptions of Fairness and Justice:
The Shared Aims and Occasional Conflicts of Legitimacy and Moral Credibility, 47
WAKE FOREST L. REV. 211, 220 (2012); Tracey L. Meares, Tom R. Tyler & Jacob
Gardener, Lawful or Fair? How Cops and Laypeople Perceive Good Policing, 105 J.
CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY (2016). But see Aziz H. Huq, Jonathan Jackson & Rick
Trinkner, Legitimating Practices: Revisiting the Predicates of Police Legitimacy
, 56 BRIT. J. CRIMINOLOGY (2016) (delving deeper into specific police practices
that are perceived to be fair or unfair).





n90  Although the police legitimacy research has inspired a great deal of legal
scholarship, the overwhelming majority of that scholarship has applied the
concept to topics other than the regulation of regular police. Scholars have
applied the theory to areas as diverse as juvenile justice, e.g., Janet E.
Ainsworth, Re-Imagining Childhood and Reconstructing the Legal Order: The Case
for Abolishing the Juvenile Court, 69 N.C. L. REV. 1083 (1991), civil dispute
resolution, e.g., Michael Abramowicz, On the Alienability of Legal Claims, 114
YALE L.J. 697 (2005); Donna Shestowsky, How Litigants Evaluate the
Characteristics of Legal Procedures: A Multi-Court Empirical Study, 49 U.C.
DAVIS L. Rev. 793 (2016); Lawrence B. Solum, Procedural Justice, 78 S. Cal. L.
Rev. 181 (2004), other areas of criminal justice, e.g., Russell M. Gold, Beyond
the Judicial Fourth Amendment: The Prosecutor's Role, 47 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 1591
(2014) (on prosecutors); Michael M. O'Hear, Plea Bargaining and Procedural
Justice, 42 GA. L. REV. 407 (2008) (on plea bargaining); Elizabeth Ingriselli,
Note, Mitigating Jurors' Racial Biases: The Effects of Content and Timing of
Jury Instructions, 124 YALE L.J. 1690 (2015) (on jury instructions), to national
security, e.g., Aziz Z. Huq, The Social Production of National Security, 98
CORNELL L. REV. 637, 693-96 (2013); Jenny S. Martinez, Process and Substance in
the "War on Terror," 108 COLUM. L. REV. 1013 (2008), and to other legal contexts
and areas of the law, e.g., Bernadette Atuahene, The Importance of Conversation
in Transitional Justice: A Study of Land Restitution in South Africa, 39 LAW &
SOC. INQUIRY 902 (2014) (applying procedural justice to transitional justice);
Ellen Berrey, Steve G. Hoffman & Laura Beth Nielsen, Situated Justice: A
Contextual Analysis of Fairness and Inequality in Employment Discrimination
Litigation, 46 LAW & SOC'Y REV. 1 (2012) (on procedural justice in employment
discrimination litigation); Jennifer K. Brooke & Tom R. Tyler, Diversity and
Corporate Performance: A Review of the Psychological Literature, 89 N.C. L. REV.
715 (2011) (on procedural justice in workplace diversity management); Margaret
B. Kwoka, Leaking and Legitimacy, 48 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 1387 (2015) (arguing
that governmental transparency laws would reduce the threat of mass information
leaks); Alexandra D. Lahav, Portraits of Resistance: Lawyer Responses to Unjust
Proceedings, 57 UCLA L. REV. 725 (2010) (on lawyers' interpretations of
procedural justice); Justin Sevier, Popularizing Hearsay, 104 GEO. L.J. 643
(2016) (on the procedural justice rationale for the hearsay rule).





n91  Schulhofer, Tyler & Huq, supra note 53.





n92  Id. at 351.





n93  Id. at 357-59. For more recent, extended discussions of departmental
management as internal procedural justice, see TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6,
at 10, 14; and Rick Trinkner, Tom R. Tyler & Philip Atiba Goff, Justice from
Within: The Relations Between a Procedurally Just Organizational Climate and
Police Organizational Efficiency, Endorsement of Democratic Policing, and
Officer Well-Being, 22 PSYCHOL. PUB. POL'Y & L. 158 (2016). John Rappaport
proposes second-order regulation of police through means other than the courts
in part because of the argument against direct regulation of police through law
in the police legitimacy literature. John Rappaport, Second-Order Regulation of
Law Enforcement, 103 CALIF. L. REV. 205, 240-45 (2015).





n94  Schulhofer, Tyler & Huq, supra note 53, at 364-74. This impulse should be
eschewed not only because of civil libertarian concerns, but also because these
tactics make people less likely to cooperate with police to aid in local
counterterrorism efforts. See Amna Akbar, National Security's Broken Windows, 62
UCLAL. REV. 834, 890-905 (2015) (urging caution about police strategies to
engage American Muslim communities in counterterrorism efforts).





n95  Rachel A. Harmon, The Problem of Policing, 110 MICH. L. REV. 761, 788-90
(2012) (characterizing the scholarship of Fagan, Harcourt, Meares, Tyler, and
others as "non law").





n96  Tracey L. Meares, The Good Cop: Knowing the Difference Between Lawful or
Effective Policing and Rightful Policing--and Why It Matters, 54 WM. & MARY L.
REV. 1865, 1875-79 (2013); Tracey L. Meares & Peter Neyroud, Rightful Policing,
NEW PERSP. POLICING (Feb. 2015), http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/248411.pdf
[http://perma.cc/4QMX-JW3C].





n97  Meares & Neyroud, supra note 96, at 8-11.






n98  See Tracey Meares, Broken Windows, Neighborhoods, and the Legitimacy of Law
Enforcement or Why I Fell in and out of Love with Zimbardo, 52 J. RES. CRIME &
DELINQ. 609, 611 (2015) [hereinafter Meares, Broken Windows] (explaining
Meares's skepticism of broken-windows policing, which she had earlier embraced,
and the benefits of the legitimacy model); see also Tracey L. Meares, The
Legitimacy of Police Among Young African-American Men, 92 MARQ. L. REV. 651, 653
(2009) [hereinafter Meares, Legitimacy of Police] ("The form of policing that
has the potential to solve the 'race issue' emphasizes process rather than
outcomes and moral engagement as opposed to notions of criminal deterrence.").





n99  Bernard E. Harcourt & Tracey L. Meares, Randomization and the Fourth
Amendment, 78 U. CHI. L. REV. 809 (2011); see also BERNARD E. HARCOURT, AGAINST
PREDICTION: PROFILING, POLICING, AND PUNISHING IN AN ACTUARIAL AGE 237-39 (2007)
(making an ambitious case that randomizing law enforcement is the only way to
free it from the bias endemic to predictive or "actuarial" modes of criminal
investigation and enforcement).





n100  See United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 560 (1976)
("[I]ndividualized suspicion is usually a prerequisite to a constitutional
search or seizure.").





n101  Meares, supra note 16, at 162; see also Report of Plaintiffs' Expert Dr.
Jeffrey Fagan at 18, Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540 (S.D.N.Y.
2013) (No. 44-5) (describing the racial geography of stop-and-frisk in New
York); Jeffrey Fagan & Garth Davies, Street Stops and Broken Windows: Terry,
Race, and Disorder in New York City, 28 FORDHAM URB. L.J. 457, 461-64 (2000)
(same); Jeffrey Fagan & Amanda Geller, Following the Script: Narratives of
Suspicion in Terry Stops in Street Policing, 82 U. CHI. L. REV. 51, 68 (2015)
(showing that police officers use group-based rather than only individual-based
justifications for suspicion). For a similar argument that is not based on
police legitimacy theory, see Akhil Reed Amar, Fourth Amendment First Principles
, 107 HARV. L. Rev. 757, 808 (1994) ("Even if racially disparate impact alone
does not violate the Constitution, surely equal protection principles call for
concern when blacks bear the brunt of a government search or seizure policy.
Thus, in a variety of search and seizure contexts, we must honestly address
racially imbalanced effects and ask ourselves whether they are truly
reasonable."). But see Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806 (1996) (concluding
that selective law enforcement on the basis of race must be addressed using a
Fourteenth Amendment equal protection analysis, not via the Fourth Amendment).





n102  Aziz Z. Huq, The Consequences of Disparate Policing: Evaluating
Stop-and-Frisk as a Modality of Urban Policing, 100 MINN. L. REV. (forthcoming
2017), http://papers.ssrn.com/s0l3/papersxfm?abstract_id=2845540
[http://perma.cc/4ZGT-Q45U].





n103  Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, supra note
51, at 19. Disparate approaches are fundamental to the organization of modern
policing. EGON BITTNER, THE FUNCTIONS OF THE POLICE IN MODERN SOCIETY 10 (1970)
("As is well known, the preferred targets of special police concern are some
ethnic and racial minorities, the poor living in urban slums, and young people
in general... [T]his kind of reasoning was basic to the very creation of the
police; for it was not assumed initially that the police would enforce laws in
the broad sense, but that they would concentrate on the control of individual
and collective tendencies towards transgression and disorder issuing from what
were referred to as the 'dangerous classes.'").





n104  William A. Westley, Violence and the Police, 59 AM. J. SOC. 34, 40 (1953).





n105  PETERMOSKOS, COP IN THE HOOD 53 (2008) (describing Baltimore police
officers' critiques of particular "cultures" rather than races); cf. EDUARDO
BONILLA-SILVA, RACISM WITHOUT RACISTS: COLOR-BLIND RACISM AND THE PERSISTENCE OF
RACIAL INEQUALITY IN THE UNITED STATES 87-90 (4th ed. 2014) (describing coded
language that some whites use to describe negative interactions with blacks);
Ian F. Haney Lopez, Post-Racial Racism: Racial Stratification and Mass
Incarceration in the Age of Ohama, 98 CALIF. L. REV. 1023, 1063-64 (2010)
(arguing that references to alleged cultures of criminality serve as a proxy for
overt racist language in the era of "colorblindness").





n106  See, e.g., Mariano Delle Donne, Procedural Justice: How a Simple Concept
Can Help Cops Make a Big Impact, POLICEONE.COM (May 6, 2016),
http://www.policeone.com/patrol-issues/articles/178689006-Procedural-justice-How
-a-simple-concept-can-help-cops-make-a-big-impact [http://perma.cc/G57E-ZF33];
Sedevic, supra note 18.





n107  See, e.g., Tyler et al., supra note 45, at 77 ("A focus on building
legitimacy via procedural justice is surely not the whole of effective policing,
but it is an important component and one that offers the possibility of making
improvements that are both affordable and manageable by the police").





n108  See Wesley G. Skogan, Maarten Van Craen & Cari Hennessy, Training Police
for Procedural Justice, 11 J. EXPERIMENTAL CRIMINOLOGY 319 (2015) (offering a
positive evaluation of a Chicago police training program based largely on
insights from legitimacy theory); see also TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6, at
17, 20-21, 34, 46, 67.





n109  See Tyler et al., supra note 45, at 77.





n110  See, e.g., EPP, MAYNARD-MOODY & HAIDER-MAPJCEL, supra note 60, at 4-5;
Paul Butler, The System Is Working the Way It Is Supposed To: The Limits of
Criminal Justice Reform, 104 GEO. L.J. 1419, 1468 (2016) ("The problem with
reform that is focused on improving perceptions about the police is that it can
cloak aggressive policing in enhanced legitimacy, and it has the potential to
blunt the momentum for rising up against overcriminalization, wealth inequality,
and white supremacy."); Robert MacCoun, Voice, Control, and Belonging: The
Double-Edged Sword of Procedural Fairness, 1 ANN. REV. L. & SOC. SCI. 171, 189
(2005) ("In the procedural justice domain, the concern is that authorities can
use the appearance of fair procedure (dignity, respect, voice) as an inexpensive
way to coopt citizens and distract them from outcomes that by normative criteria
might be considered substantively unfair or biased."); William J. Stuntz, Local
Policing After the Terror, 111 YALE L.J. 2137, 2174 (2002) ("If Tyler's claims
are even partly true, the police could simultaneously increase the number of
Terry stops, decrease the injury those stops cause, and substantially reduce
complaints of police discrimination--all without changing the way they select
search targets"). From a Gramscian perspective, procedural justice might be part
of a politically hegemonic discourse that assures public consent to domination.
See Gramsci, supra note 84, at 137.





n111  See, e.g., United States v. Drayton, 536 U.S. 194, 203-04 (2002) (ruling
that a search was voluntary in part because the officer spoke in a "polite,
quiet voice"); Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 531 (1983) (Rehnquist, J.,
dissenting) (arguing that a search was voluntary in part because "[t]here were
neither threats nor any show of force," "[t]he detectives did not touch
[defendant] and made no demands," and "the detectives were quite polite");
United States v. Hughes, 640 F.3d 428, 437 (1st Cir. 2011) ("The troopers were
polite and never hectored the defendant or raised their voices. Details such as
these are entitled to some weight in determining whether a particular
interrogation was custodial."); Lopera v. Town of Coventry, 640 F.3d 388, 407-08
(1st Cir. 2011) (Thompson, J., dissenting) ("[T]he fact that the officers were
polite, particularly given all else that was occurring at the highly charged
scene, does not establish that [the defendant] was not coerced ... [S]ubtle and
polite coercion is just as objectionable as more obvious browbeating."); United
States v. Kim, 27 F.3d 947, 965-66 (3d Cir. 1994) ("Although the tone of the
officer's voice is relevant to the extent that a forceful tone of voice may make
a reasonable person think that they must comply with the officer's requests . .
. the lack of such a forceful tone does not entirely deprive blunt and direct
questions of their coercive force."); United States v. Munoz, 987 F. Supp. 2d
438, 447 (S.D.N.Y. 2013) ("The police officers' polite treatment does not
outweigh the coercive effect of a false promise that a warrant would issue,
particularly when coupled with the threat of arrest.").





n112  See JEREMY BENTHAM, THE BOOK OF FALLACIES 350 (Philip Schofield ed., 2015)
(1824) ("A sham security is a great deal worse than none: a consciousness of
insecurity keeps suspicion and vigilance alive: a sham security, according to
the extent to which it is accepted as real, relaxes suspicion or destroys it.").





n113  See supra text accompanying notes 76-78.





n114  ÉMILEDURKHEIM, THE DIVISION OF LABOR IN SOCIETY 102 (W.D. Halls trans.,
2014) (1893).





n115  Id. at 88-91; cf. FOUCAULT, supra note 16, at 138 (describing the project
of modern criminal justice as bodily discipline).





n116  DURKHEIM, supra note 114, at 90.





n117  ROBERT K. MERTON, SOCIAL THEORY AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE 216 (1957).





n118  Id.





n119  See Bernard E. Harcourt, Reflecting on the Subject: A Critique of the
Social Influence Conception of Deterrence, the Broken Windows Theory, and
Order-Maintenance Policing New York Style, 97 MICH. L. REV. 291, 347-68 (1998)
(critiquing the use of Durkheim to support order-maintenance policing among
law-and-social-norms scholars and proposing a Foucauldian bodily control
perspective).





n120  Sampson & Bartusch, supra note 9, at 777.





n121  Id. at 778.





n122  See ÉMILE DURKHEIM, SUICIDE: A STUDY IN SOCIOLOGY 246-58 (George Simpson
ed., John A. Spaulding & George Simpson trans., Free Press 1951) (1897). Merton
refined this conception of anomie. He saw anomie arising from "strain," the
increasing growth of society's goals and the inability of society to provide to
everyone the means necessary to achieve those goals. MERTON, supra note 117, at
211. This definition fits well with the problem of racialized and class-located
anomie and disobedience of the law that concerns many scholars and law-makers
today.





n123  Liminality is a state of being in-between, not fully inside a particular
institution or cultural milieu, but not fully detached from it. See VICTOR
TURNER, THE FOREST OF SYMBOLS: ASPECTS OF NDEMBU RITUAL 93-94 (1967); ARNOLD VAN
GENNEP, THE RITES OF PASSAGE 11 (Monika B. Vizedom & Gabrielle L. Caffee trans.,
Univ. of Chi. Press 1960). It is worth nothing that Van Gennep was a sharp
critic of Durkheim, though the critique focused more on Durkheim's use of data
and not on basic concepts like anomie. See Bj[#xF8]rn Thomassen, Emile Durkheim
Between Gabriel Tarde and Arnold van Gennep: Founding Moments of Sociology and
Anthropology, 24 SOC. ANTHROPOLOGY 231, 238-40 (2012). For examples of
scholarship applying the concept of liminality in studies of marginal groups in
the United States, see Khiara M. Bridges, An Anthropological Meditation on Ex
Parte Anonymous - A Judicial Bypass Procedure for an Adolescent's Abortion, 94
CALIF. L. REV. 215, 223-24 & n.39 (2006); Jennifer Chac[#xF3]n, Producing
Liminal Legality, 92 DENV. U. L. REV. 709, 713-18 (2015); Cecilia Menj[#xED]var,
Liminal Legality: Salvadoran and Guatemalan Immigrants' Lives in the United
States, 111 AM. J. SOC. 999, 1007 (2006); and Priscilla Ocen, (E)Racing
Childhood: Examining the Racialized Construction of Childhood and Innocence in
the Treatment of Sexually Exploited Minors, 62 UCLA L. REV. 1586, 1596-1600
(2015).





n124  ELIJAH ANDERSON, CODE OF THE STREET 34 (1999).





n125  See Robert K. Merton, Social Structure and Anomie, 3 AM. SOC. REV. 672,
672 (1938) (arguing that anomie is not only the product of wayward human
impulses with an insufficient amount of legal constraint, but that law and the
social structure itself can "exert a definite pressure" on people, producing
anomie and deviant behavior).





n126  However, an increasing body of research on legal legitimacy focuses
specifically on communities that are generally understood to be high in legal
cynicism. Compare Sampson & Bartusch, supra note 9, at 780-81 (discussing
research on black and inner-city populations), with VICTOR M. RIOS, PUNISHED:
POLICING THE LIVES OF BLACK AND LATINO BOYS (2011) (discussing the interactions
between law enforcement institutions and young black and Latino men in Oakland).





n127  See ROBERT J. SAMPSON, GREAT AMERICAN CITY 365-67 (2012); Kirk &
Papachristos, supra note 9; see also Jacinta M. Gau, Procedural Justice, Police
Legitimacy, and Legal Cynicism: A Test for Mediation Effects, 16 POLICE PRAC. &
RES. 402 (2015) (analyzing links between legitimacy and cynicism); Neil Gross, A
Pragmatist Theory of Social Mechanisms, 74 AM. SOC. REV. 358, 373-74 (2009)
(examining the role of social mechanisms in cultural analysis); Alex R. Piquero
et al., Developmental Trajectories of Legal Socialization Among Serious
Adolescent Offenders, 96 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 267, 270-72 (2005)
(discussing legal socialization and legitimation of the law among adolescent
offenders).





n128  Eminent political scientist Michael Dawson has offered the most widely
known articulation of this idea. See, e.g., MICHAEL DAWSON, BEHIND THE MULE:
RACE AND CLASS IN AFRICAN AMERICAN POLITICS 57 (1994).





n129  See Sampson & Bartusch, supra note 9, at 784 ("One can be highly
intolerant of crime, but live in a disadvantaged context bereft of legal
sanctions and perceived justice.").





n130  See, e.g., Bell, supra note 42, at 316 (describing "'mothers' narratives
of occasional police reliance, despite their overarching distrust"); Forrest
Stuart, Becoming "Copwise": Policing, Culture, and the Collateral Consequences
of Street-Level Criminalization, 50 LAW & SOC'Y REV. 279, 292-93 (2016)
(describing Skid Row residents' strategies for understanding unpredictable
police actions by learning to "see like a cop").





n131  See Brooks, supra note 57, at 1224 & n.20; Ta-Nehisi Coates, The Near
Certainty of Anti-Police Violence, ATLANTIC (July 12, 2016),
http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/07/the-near-certainty-of-anti-p
olice-violence/490541 [http://perma.cc/QZ87-XBY3] ("In the black community, it's
the force they deploy, and not any higher American ideal, that gives police
their power . . . . [I]f the law represents nothing but the greatest force, then
it really is indistinguishable from any other street gang."); Kay Levine &
Virginia Mellema, Strategizing the Street: How Law Matters in the Lives of Women
in the Street-Level Drug Economy, 26 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 169, 184 (2001); see
also David K. Shipler, Living Under Suspicion, N.Y. TIMES (Feb. 7, 1997),
http://www.nytimes.com/1997/02/07/opinion/living-under-suspicion.html
[http://perma.cc/9GWC-RLJR] (explaining contrasting reactions by race on the
outcome of the O.J. Simpson trial).





n132  One could argue that some of the de-emphasized aspects of Tyler and
collaborators' legitimacy theory, the ideas of motive-based trust or "normative
alignment" ("a sense that police officers' sense of right and wrong mirrors that
of the communities they work in"), account for these concerns about protection
and threat. Jonathan Jackson & Jacinta M. Gau, Carving Up Concepts?
Differentiating Between Trust and Legitimacy in Public Attitudes Towards Legal
Authority, in INTERDISCIPLINARY PERSPECTIVES ON TRUST 49, 57 (Ellie Shockley et
al. eds., 2016). Yet even if space can be found in legitimacy theory for these
concerns, they are not central to the theory in the way they are to legal
estrangement theory.





n133  See Bell, supra note 42, at 326-29.





n134  I do not claim that these theories are free of overlap, in certain
respects. Yet that they are related to each other does not mean they are
equivalent. For example, the primary analytical focus of legitimacy theory is
individual compliance with the law, while the primary analytical focus of legal
estrangement theory is a collective, cultural relationship with the law. Yet
legitimacy theorists attempt to deal with the problem of collectivity by
aggregating individual views (an approach that is antithetical to the way many
sociologists think about culture). In contrast, legal estrangement recognizes
that culture exists both within and outside individuals, and that in order to
understand macro-level reality, one must have some vision of micro-level
reality. Steven Lukes, Introduction to EMILE DURKHEIM, THE RULES OF SOCIOLOGICAL
METHOD xvi (Steven Lukes ed., 2013, W. D. Halls trans., 1982) (2d ed. 1901)
("Every, macro-theory presupposes . . . a micro-theory to back up its
explanations."). For this reason, procedural injustice on an interactional level
is important to the development of a collective culture of legal cynicism. Yet
simply because procedural injustice contributes to legal estrangement does not
mean that procedural justice alone can dismantle legal estrangement, because
culture is both individual and superindividual.





n135  I use the word "culture" to refer to shared ways of seeing the world and
strategies of action. Culture is not endemic to particular classes or ethnic
groups, but instead emerged, and continues to evolve, in response to structural
conditions. See, e.g., Michèle Lamont & Mario Luis Small, How Culture Matters:
Enriching Our Understandings of Poverty, in THE COLORS OF POVERTY: WHY RACIAL
AND ETHNIC DISPARITIES PERSIST 76 (Ann Chih Lin & David R. Harris eds., 2008)
(developing a structural account of culture that is separate from race); Ann
Swidler, Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies, 51 AM. SOC. REV. 273, 273
(1986) (describing culture as providing a "'tool kit of habits', skills, and
styles from which people construct 'strategies of action'"); see also ERVING
GOFFMAN, FRAME ANALYSIS 21 (1974) (describing "schemata of interpretation").





n136  One way in which the current scholarship on distrust in the law falls
short is that it presents a limited view of what some scholars refer to as legal
socialization--the developmental process through which people gain their
perceptions of the law and law enforcement over time. Some scholars have probed
legal socialization as a central concept; others omit that specific term but
catalogue various pathways toward divergent perspectives on the police and law
enforcement. See, e.g., Jeffrey Fagan & Tom R. Tyler, Legal Socialization of
Children and Adolescents, 18 SOC. JUST. RES. 217, 221 (2005); June Louin Tapp &
Felice J. Levine, Legal Socialization: Strategies for an Ethical Legality, 27
STAN. L. REV. 1 (1974); Rick Trinkner & Ellen S. Cohn, Putting the "Social" Back
in Legal Socialization: Procedural Justice, Legitimacy, and Cynicism in Legal
and Nonlegal Authorities, 38 LAW &HUM. BEHAV. 602 (2014); see also RIOS, supra
note 126 at xiv, 158-59 (2011) (describing the legal socialization process of
young men of color as "hypercriminalization").





n137  Hearing Their Voices: Understanding the Freddie Gray Uprising is an
in-depth interview study of sixty-four young people, aged fifteen to
twenty-four, who live within the city of Baltimore, Maryland. The study, funded
in part by the Annie E. Casey Foundation, seeks to develop an in-depth
understanding of how youth in the city perceive the death of Freddie Gray and
its aftermath and to capture their recollections and perceptions of police and
the criminal justice system. The study, which the author of this Essay designed
and managed, used multiple recruitment strategies including random sampling in a
neighborhood near the heart of the unrest, ethnographic sampling from spending
time in key neighborhood venues, and sampling using participatory action
research, a method in which people from the study population (here, youth who
live in Baltimore) acted as co-researchers with the professional researchers.
The purpose of using these strategies was to purposively construct a
heterogeneous yet analytically meaningful sample of Baltimore youth and to gain
a richer empathetic understanding of their experiences. See, e.g., JACQUES M.
CHEVALIER & DANIEL J. BUCKLES, PARTICIPATORY ACTION RESEARCH: THEORY AND METHODS
FOR ENGAGED INQUIRY 1-6 (2013); see also 1 WEBER, supra note 77, at 5 ("Empathic
or appreciative accuracy is attained when, through sympathetic participation, we
can adequately grasp the emotional context in which the action took place.").
This Essay draws upon selected cases within the interview sample to clarify key
processes derived from theory. These cases are not intended to be representative
of all respondents, but are instead used to illustrate theoretical points,
drawing inspiration from case study logic and the qualitative research method of
portraiture. See SARA LAWRENCE-LIGHTFOOT & JESSICA HOFFMANN DAVIS, THE ART AND
SCIENCE OF PORTRAITURE (1997); Mario Luis Small, "How Many Cases Do I Need?": On
Science and the Logic of Case Selection in Field-Based Research, 10 ETHNOGRAPHY
5, 24-27 (2009).





n138  All names of respondents are pseudonyms.





n139  I have described complexity and contextual contingency of police trust and
reliance in other work. See generally Bell, supra note 42.





n140  All quotations attributed to Shawna were recorded during an interview
conducted by the author and Janice Bonsu on July 1, 2015.





n141  Cf. Solomon M. Hsiang, Marshall Burke & Edward Miguel, Quantifying the
Influence of Climate on Human Conflict, 341 SCI. 1212, 1235 (2013) (finding that
warmer temperatures increase conflict).





n142  See, e.g., Alisa Ames et al., 2011 Neighborhood Health Profile:
Sandtown-Winchester/Harlem Park, BALT. CITY HEALTH DEP'T 10-11 (Dec. 2011),
http://health.baltimorecity.gov/sites/default/files/47%20Sandtown.pdf
[http://perma.cc/3E6E-TZXT] (documenting low life expectancy and high mortality
in certain Baltimore neighborhoods).





n143  Cf. Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. 266, 276 (2000) (Kennedy, J., concurring)
(explaining that "the ability of the police to trace the identity of anonymous
telephone informants" is important for determining whether an anonymous tip is
sufficiently reliable to justify a Terry stop).





n144  See, e.g., Sarah Larimer, Disgraced Ex-Cop Daniel Holtzclaw Sentenced to
263 Years for On-Duty Rapes, Sexual Assaults, WASH. POST (Jan. 22, 2016),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/01/21/disgraced-ex-office
r-daniel-holtzclaw-to-be-sentenced-after-sex-crimes-conviction
[http://perma.cc/5JXK-EUM9].





n145  In an Alford plea, defendants maintain their innocence but concede that
the prosecution has enough evidence that a judge or jury would likely find them
guilty. See North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25, 37-38 (1970).





n146  Melissa Harris, Officer Accused in Sex Case Is To Resign: Prison Term
Suspended in Case Involving Girl, 16, BALT. SUN (Jan. 11, 2008),
http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2008-01-11/news/0801110107_1_welch-missing-evid
ence-baltimore-county [http://perma.cc/79CN-KBEP].





n147  Id.





n148  Julie Bykowicz, Items Missing in Rape Case; Defense Seeks To Exclude DNA
in Trial for Officer Accused of Assault, BALT. SUN (July 17, 2007),
http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2007-07-17/news/0707170088_1_welch-evidence-con
trol-baltimore-police-department [http://perma.cc/5NGD-ZSDY].





n149  Harris, supra note 146.





n150  E.g., Julie Bykowicz, Jones' Rape Case Ends: City 'Flex' Officer Won't
Face Trial Other Issues Pending, BALT. SUN (Apr. 3, 2007),
http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2007-04-03/news/0704030038_1_jones-police-offic
er-flex [http://perma.cc/U7UF-JTS4] (describing charges against former Baltimore
police officer Jemini Jones); Gadi Dechter, Former City Officer Charged with
Rape, BALT. SUN (Aug. 3, 2008),
http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2008-08-03/news/0808020193_1_welch-baltimore-po
lice-misconduct-in-office [http://perma.cc/4GBJ-9A6A] (describing accusations
against former Baltimore police officer Rohan Mays).





n151  The third floor of Mondawmin is essentially a social services center, a
transition that began in the late 1960s after white flight from the neighborhood
and the loss of the mall's anchor store, Sears. Among the mall's tenants are a
city-run one-stop career center, an outpatient mental health clinic, a
healthcare clinic, and a branch of Baltimore City Department of Social Services
that helps adults avoid crises like eviction, electricity shutoff, and mental
collapses. See Directory, MONDAWMIN MALL,
http://www.mondawmin.com/en/directory/map.html [http://perma.cc/CXH2-W2NS].





n152  For scholarship describing the increasing prevalence of private police in
American society, see Elizabeth E. Joh, The Paradox of Private Policing, 95 J.
CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 49 (2004); and David Alan Sklansky, Private Police and
Democracy, 43 AM. CRIM. L. REV. 89 (2006). For people who frequently encounter
public and private police, the officers may well blend into one miasma of police
control, regardless of their governance structure. This indistinguishableness
could mean that the bad acts of poorly trained, less regulated private security
officers contribute to negative perceptions of city police, and further research
should test this hypothesis.





n153  See, e.g., I. Bennett Capers, Policing, Race, and Place, 44 HARV.
C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 43, 68-69 (2009) (noting the stigmatic harm of minor police
maltreatment); Fryer, supra note 59, at 3, 8 (describing the study's data, which
ranks the use of hands--such as slapping or grabbing--as a "lower level use[] of
force"). This limited conception of use of force also plagues governmental
agencies tasked with investigating police misconduct. For example, in October
2016, police officers in Edina, Minnesota (a suburb of Minneapolis) arrested
Larnie Thomas, an African American man, for "disorderly conduct and failure to
obey a traffic signal." Christine Hauser, Black Man Is Arrested While Walking,
and Minnesota City Starts a 'Conversation,' N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 19, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/20/us/minnesota-video-walking.html
[http://perma.cc/2WFM-EUHE]. The officer initially on the scene, Tim Olson,
confronted Thomas and grabbed him by his shoulder for walking on the white line
near the shoulder of the road even though the sidewalk was closed for
construction. Id. The city concluded that Olson "had followed proper procedures"
when he arrested Thomas. Id. The State of Minnesota's Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension, a bureau of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety, chose not
to investigate the arrest because it did not result in "a death or serious
injury." Id. The Bureau's decision did not acknowledge the social meaning of the
incident--perhaps the deeper injury.





n154  See Manny Fernandez, Freddie Gray's Injury and the Police 'Rough Ride,'
N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 30, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/01/us/freddie-grays-injury-and-the-police-rough-r
ide.html [http://perma.cc/ZH8V-P79A] (describing the practice of "rough rides"
and "nickel rides," during which police subject often-unsecured passengers
detained in the back of police vans to intentionally rough rides to cause
displeasure or injury).





n155  There has been much debate over the best term to use when describing the
property damage that occurred in Baltimore in the aftermath of Freddie Gray's
death. While most news outlets called the events "riots," others preferred
"uprising" or "unrest." See, e.g., Katy Waldman, Is Baltimore Beset by Protests,
Riots, or an Uprising?, SLATE (Apr. 29, 2015, 5:01 PM),
http://www.slate.com/blogs/lexicon_valley/2015/04/29/protest_versus_riot_versus_
uprising_the_language_of_the_baltimore_freddie.html [http://perma.cc/X7DU-JNHV].
I do not take a position on the most accurate term but use "riot" here because
it was the preferred language of study participants.





n156  Six officers involved in Freddie Gray's final arrest were charged with an
array of crimes in May 2015, a move that made the State's Attorney for
Baltimore, Marilyn Mosby, a polarizing national figure. Between May and July
2016, three officers were acquitted. On July 27, 2016, after the judge declared
a mistrial in a fourth officer's case, Mosby dropped charges against the three
officers who had not already been acquitted. Sarah Almukhtar et al., Freddie
Gray Case Ends with No Convictions of Any Police Officers, N.Y. TIMES (July 27,
2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/04/30/us/what-happened-freddie-gray-arre
sted-by-baltimore-police-department-map-timeline.html
[http://perma.cc/9E3Y-L294]; Justin Fenton, State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby
Assails Police, Pledges To Pursue Reforms, BALT. SUN (July 27, 2016, 10:41 PM)
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/freddie-gray/bs-md-ci-mosby-dropped-ch
arges-20160727-story.html [http://perma.cc/6KQW-MVLB]. While others, including
Baltimore's mayor and former police commissioner, criticized Mosby for
continuing to argue that systemic failures plague the Baltimore Police
Department when she announced dropping the remaining Freddie Gray charges, the
DOJ's August 2016 report supported Mosby's assertions. See Civil Rights Div.,
Investigation of the Baltimore City Police Department, U.S. DEP'T JUST. 4 (Aug.
10, 2016) [hereinafter DOJ BALTIMORE REPORT],
http://www.justice.gov/opa/file/883366/download [http://perma.cc/6RNF-GFXM].





n157  Ben Feuerherd & Bob Fredericks, Obama Calls Baltimore Rioters "Criminals
and Thugs," N.Y. POST (Apr. 28, 2015, 3:36 PM),
http://nypost.com/2015/04/28/obama-calls-baltimore-rioters-criminals-and-thugs
[http://perma.cc/ZU5G-8WWB].





n158  Erin Cox & Michael Dresser, Gov. Larry Hogan Promises More than 1,000
Additional Troops, Vows To Prevent Rioting, BALT. SUN (Apr. 28, 2015, 1:52 PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/politics/blog/bal-hogan-in-baltimore-v
ows-to-bring-rioting-under-control-20150428-story.html
[http://perma.cc/A7L4-JEZU].





n159  Mark Reutter & Fern Shen, State of Emergency Declared for Baltimore, BALT.
BREW (Apr. 27, 2015, 11:17 PM),
http://www.baltimorebrew.com/2015/04/27/state-of-emergency-declared-for-baltimor
e [http://perma.cc/VQH5-QUWM].





n160  Elizabeth Chuck, Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake Under Fire for
'Space' To Destroy Comment, NBC NEWS (Apr. 28, 2015, 1:59 PM),
http://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/baltimore-unrest/mayor-stephanie-rawlings-blake
-under-fire-giving-space-destroy-baltimore-n349656 [http://perma.cc/3992-98MK].





n161  See Editorial, The Problem with 'Thugs,' BALT. SUN (Apr. 29, 2015, 3:52
PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/editorial/bs-ed-thugs-freddie-gray-2015
0429-story.html [http://perma.cc/C9WF-VRJS].





n162  David Jackson, Obama Stands by the Term 'Thugs,' White House Says, USA
TODAY (Apr. 29, 2015, 2:59 PM),
http://www.usatoday.com/story/theoval/2015/04/29/obama-white-house-baltimore-ste
phanie-rawlings-blake/26585143 [http://perma.cc/YN3M-HH57].





n163  For background information on the Charleston mass killing, see, for
example, Matt Ford & Adam Chandler, 'Hate Crime': A Mass Killing at a Historic
Church, ATLANTIC (June 19, 2015),
http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2015/06/shooting-emanuel-ame-charles
ton/396209 [http://perma.cc/6CTW-E3Z5]. The shooter, Dylann Roof, was eventually
sentenced to death. See Alan Blinder & Kevin Sack, Dylann Roof Is Sentenced to
Death in Charleston Church Massacre, N.Y. TIMES (Jan. 10, 2017),
http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/10/us/dylann-roof-trial-charleston.html
[http://perma.cc/ZXA4-8X86].





n164  See, e.g., Todd Sumlin, Charleston Shooting Suspect's Burger King Meal
Gets National Attention, CHARLOTTE OBSERVER (June 24, 2015, 8:51 AM),
http://www.charlotteobserver.com/news/local/article25394389.html
[http://perma.cc/L7H7-ZB8R]. Withholding food from an arrestee during
interrogation can indicate coercion under a totality of the circumstances
analysis, thereby invalidating any evidence that police obtain. See Greenwald v.
Wisconsin, 390 U.S. 519, 521 (1968); Clewis v. Texas, 386 U.S. 707, 712 (1967);
Reck v. Pate, 367 U.S. 433, 441-42 (1961). While some onlookers interpreted this
provision of a Burger King meal as a special treat or an indicator of the
greater respect they had for Roof's (white) life, it is worth noting that by
providing Roof with a meal, officers also ensured that any evidence obtained
from Roof would be admissible in court.





n165  But see Tom R. Tyler & Jonathan Jackson, Popular Legitimacy and the
Exercise of Legal Authority: Motivating Compliance, Cooperation, and Engagement,
20 PSYCHOL. PUB. POL'Y & L. 78, 89 (2014) (finding, using survey data, that
although African Americans view the police as less legitimate than whites do,
they do not see the law as less legitimate than whites do). This finding may
stem from a belief that the police do not actually represent the law, that they
are just another group or gang. See supra note 131 and accompanying text.





n166  See Kirk & Papachristos, supra note 9, at 1191.





n167  For an overview of a wide variety of literature on the connection between
procedural justice and legitimacy, see Tyler et al., supra note 45, at 86.





n168  Tyler, Procedural Justice, supra note 10, at 350.





n169  All quotations attributed to Justin were recorded during an interview
conducted by Janice Bonsu and Trinard Sharpe on July 23, 2015.





n170  It is not surprising that Justin projects his police encounters into views
on the government and the powerful more generally. Police officers are the
quintessential "street-level bureaucrats," the faces of abstract systems, whose
interactions with citizens are believed to shape their larger view of the
government. See GIDDENS, supra note 63, at 79-88; MICHAEL LIPSKY, STREET-LEVEL
BUREAUCRACY 3 (30th Anniversary ed. 2010).





n171  This respondent's preference to walk in the street, avoiding proximity to
trees out of concern for his safety, is reminiscent of a similar preference
among some Chicago high school students that has been documented
journalistically. See Harper High School, Part I Transcript, THIS AM. LIFE (Feb.
15, 2013), http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/487/transcript
[http://perma.cc/3HUN-GWG8] (quoting a student who explained that "we never like
to walk past trees and stuff" in order to avoid gangs). One might expect a
similar logic to operate among teens in inner-city Baltimore.





n172  MD. CODE ANN., TRANSP. § 21-506 (LexisNexis 2016) requires pedestrians to
walk on sidewalks when possible, and on the left shoulder or far left side of a
roadway when a sidewalk is unavailable. Failure to comply with this
transportation provision is a misdemeanor. Whitt v. Dynan, 315 A.2d 122, 126
(Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1974). The DOJ, in its investigation of the Ferguson,
Missouri Police Department pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 14141, noted that Ferguson
police routinely ticketed and fined African Americans for violating a city
ordinance that regulates the "Manner of Walking in Roadway," an offense similar
to the one Justin and his friends were committing. Ninety-five percent of the
people cited for manner-of-walking violations in Ferguson between 2012 and 2014
were African American. Civil Rights Div., Investigation of the Ferguson Police
Department, U.S. DEP'T JUST. 62 (Mar. 4, 2015),
http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/opa/press-releases/attachments/2015/0
3/04/ferguson_police_department_report.pdf [http://perma.cc/FF7V-XCCL]. The
Justice Department's Baltimore report roundly criticizes the Baltimore Police
Department for criminalizing African Americans' presence in public spaces,
especially streets and sidewalks. See DOJ BALTIMORE REPORT, supra note 156, at
6-7. However, it does not mention section 21-506 of the state transportation
code as a potential pretext for some walking stops.





n173  See Russell K. Robinson, Perceptual Segregation, 108 COLUM. L. REV. 1093,
1145 (2008) ("[T]he net psychological impact of making an attribution to
discrimination is negative.").





n174  Justin identified the exercise of power more generally as an aspect of
procedurally unjust policing. Research from social psychology suggests that
officers who use a disproportionately large amount of force against African
American men might be trying to assert their manhood even more than their
authority. See L. Song Richardson & Phillip Atiba Goff, Interrogating Racial
Violence, 12 OHIO ST. J. CRIM. L. 115, 128-42 (2014); see also Devon W. Carbado
& Patrick Rock, What Exposes African Americans to Police Violence?, 51 HARV.
C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 159, 175-85 (2016) (summarizing the different types of social
and psychological threats police officers might feel, which increase the
likelihood of officer violence).





n175  See RIOS, supra note 126, at xiv-xv.





n176  MD. CODE ANN., TRANSP. § 21-506.





n177  See Rod K. Brunson & Ronald Weitzer, Negotiating Unwelcome Police
Encounters: The Intergenerational Transmission of Conduct Norms, 40 J. CONTEMP.
ETHNOGRAPHY 425, 429 (2011); cf. TYLER &HUO, supra note 8, at 133 (finding that
recent personal experience explained thirty percent of the variance in people's
assessments of the legitimacy of law and legal authority); Tyler & Fagan, supra
note 8, at 255 (excluding respondents who had zero personal experiences with the
police from their analysis); Tyler & Sevier, supra note 44, at 1127 (explaining
that only nine percent of their interview sample had recent personal experience
with the courts).





n178  See TYLER & HUO, supra note 8, at 29 ("As psychologists, our primary
concern is with people's attitudes, judgments, and feelings, and with the role
of these subjective elements in shaping behavior."); see also Lars Udehn, The
Changing Face of Methodological Individualism, 28 ANN. REV. SOC. 479, 487-88
(2002) (locating "psychologism" in debates over methodological individualism in
early American sociology).





n179  See TYLER, supra note 85, at 94 (confirming through survey data that
personal experience with the police affects people's assessments of its
legitimacy); TYLER & HUO, supra note 8, at 131-38 (showing that personal
experiences influence "societal orientations" but without mentioning vicarious
experiences).





n180  See, e.g., RONALD WEITZER & STEVEN A. TUCH, RACE AND POLICING IN AMERICA
183-84 (2006) (describing "negativity bias"); Kirk & Papachristos, supra note 9,
at 1201 ("Direct experiences with harassing police may influence an individual's
cynicism, but this cynicism becomes cultural through social interaction. In this
sense, individuals' own experiential-based perception of the law becomes
solidified through a collective process whereby residents develop a shared
meaning of the behavior of the law and the viability of the law to ensure their
safety.").





n181  See Naomi F. Sugie, Chilling Effects: Diminished Political Participation
Among Partners of Formerly Incarcerated Men, 62 SOC. PROBS. 550 (2015).





n182  MEGAN COMFORT, DOING TIME TOGETHER: LOVE AND FAMILY IN THE SHADOW OF THE
PRISON 65-98 (2008).





n183  E.g., Ande Nesmith & Ebony Ruhland, Children of Incarcerated Parents:
Challenges and Resiliency, in Their Own Words, 30 CHILD. & YOUTH SERVS. REV.
1119 (2008). See generally NELL BERNSTEIN, ALL ALONE IN THE WORLD: CHILDREN OF
THE INCARCERATED (2005) (offering a journalistic account of the experiences and
perspectives of children of incarcerated parents).





n184  Christopher Muller & Daniel Schrage, Mass Imprisonment and Trust in the
Law, 651 ANNALS AM. ACAD. POL. & SOC. SCI. 139, 150 (2014).





n185  There are a few examples in sociological literature. See, e.g., RIOS,
supra note 126, at 151-52; Nikki Jones, "The Regular Routine": Proactive
Policing and Adolescent Development Among Young, Poor Black Men, 143 NEW
DIRECTIONS FOR CHILD & ADOLESCENT DEV. 33 (2014). Emerging legal scholarship is
beginning to recognize this process and explore potential solutions to it. See,
e.g., Huq, supra note 102.





n186  See J.M. BALKIN, CULTURAL SOFTWARE: A THEORY OF IDEOLOGY 67-73 (1998)
(describing memes and processes of cultural transmission); Jeffrey K. Olick &
Joyce Robbins, Social Memory Studies: From "Collective Memory" to the Historical
Sociology of Mnemonic Practices, 24 ANN. REV. SOC. 105 (1998).





n187  E.g., Robert S. Chang, Closing Essay: Developing a Collective Memory To
Imagine a Better Future, 49 UCLA L. REV. 1601 (2002) (arguing that the
collective memory of Asian Americans can be deployed to improve constitutional
law); Meir Dan-Cohen, Skirmishes on the Temporal Boundaries of States, 72 LAW &
CONTEMP. PROBS. 95 (2009) (describing how collective memory can inform state
conflicts); Katherine M. Franke, The Uses of History in Struggles for Racial
Justice: Colonizing the Past and Managing Memory, 47 UCLA L. REV. 1673 (2000)
(articulating challenges for the use of collective memory in the pursuit of
racial justice); Mark J. Osiel, Ever Again: Legal Remembrance of Administrative
Massacre, 144 U. PA. L. REV. 463 (1995) (identifying six problems with states
using criminal prosecutions to solidify collective memory of state-sponsored
mass-murder); Norman W. Spaulding, Constitution As Countermonument: Federalism,
Reconstruction, and the Problem of Collective Memory, 103 COLUM. L. REV. 1992
(2003) (arguing for the relevance of the collective memory of the Civil War and
Reconstruction to contemporary federalism jurisprudence).





n188  See, e.g., MAURICE HALBWACHS, ON COLLECTIVE MEMORY 54-83 (Lewis A. Coser
ed. & trans., Univ. of Chi. Press 1992) (1952) (describing the collective memory
of the family); Michel Anteby & Virág Molnár, Collective Memory Meets
Organizational Identity: Remembering To Forget in a Firm's Rhetorical History,
55 ACAD. MGMT. J. 515 (2012) (analyzing ways of sustaining a firm's collective
identity); Lauren A. Rivera, Managing "Spoiled" National Identity: War, Tourism,
and Memory in Croatia, 73 AM. SOC. REV. 613, 631 (2008) (discussing limitations
on collective memory in response to societies' "difficult pasts").





n189  See generally JEFFREY C. ALEXANDER ET AL., CULTURAL TRAUMA AND COLLECTIVE
IDENTITY (2004) (drawing upon case studies of September 11, American slavery,
and the Holocaust to explore group-level traumatic memories).





n190  Reuben A. Buford May, Race Talk and Local Collective Memory Among African
American Men in a Neighborhood Tavern, 23 QUALITATIVE SOC. 201, 202 (2000). This
form of collective memory might be particularly salient among African Americans.
Id. Although the empirical evidence is mixed, some scholars have argued that
African Americans are more likely to believe in "common" or "linked" fate, i.e.,
the idea that their individual success and experience of justice is connected to
the success and just treatment of African Americans as a group. See DAWSON,
supra note 128, at 76; Paula D. McClain et al., Group Membership, Group
Identity, and Group Consciousness: Measures of Racial Identity in American
Politics?, 12 ANN. REV. POL. SCI. 471, 477-79 (2009). But see Claudine Gay,
Jennifer Hochschild & Ariel White, Americans' Belief in Linked Fate: Does the
Measure Capture the Concept?, 1 J. RACE ETHNICITY & POL. 117, 139-40 (2016)
(suggesting that either linked fate is no longer as unique to African Americans
as once suggested or that the usual instrument used to measure linked fate is
insufficient).





n191  To understand the origins and positions of the Black Lives Matter and
corresponding policereform movements, see, for example, BLACK LIVES MATTER,
http://blacklivesmatter.com [http://perma.cc/QSS4-VXYP]; and CAMPAIGN ZERO,
supra note 59. See also Jocelyn Simonson, Copwatching, 104 CALIF. L. REV. 391
(2016) (conceptualizing organized videotaping of police interactions as an
adversarial form of police accountability).






n192  See Jenna Wortham, Racism's Psychological Toll, N.Y. TIMES MAG. (June 24,
2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/24/magazine/racisms-psychological-toll.html
[http://perma.cc/M8FW-GT4V].





n193  See WEITZER & TUCH, supra note 180, at 183-84 (finding that mass media
coverage of police deviance alters citizens' perceptions of the police and
noting that media influence on citizens' perceptions of the police has received
little scholarly attention).





n194  See BALKIN, supra note 186, at 43 (explaining that the "building blocks"
of culture are transmitted "either face to face or through media of
communication like writing, television, or the Internet"); Buford May, supra
note 190, at 202.





n195  Cf. Tyler & Wakslak, supra note 85, at 261-62 (finding an association
between the belief that racial profiling is more prevalent and the tendency to
interpret personal interactions with the police as examples of profiling).





n196  See Swidler, supra note 135, at 278-80 (explaining that culture is more
likely to drive human behavior during periods of social transformation when
prescribed social rituals are less clear); cf. DURKHEIM, supra note 122, at
246-59 (describing anomie as a problem of cultural instability); Mark Anthony
Hoffman & Peter S. Bearman, Bringing Anomie Back in: Exceptional Events and
Excess Suicide, 2 SOC. SCI. 186, 187, 190-92 (2015) (same).





n197  All quotations attributed to Jamila were recorded during an interview
conducted by the author and Janice Bonsu on June 17, 2015.





n198  The McCulloh Homes, erected in the mid-1930s, was one of Baltimore's first
public housing developments intended to house solely African American residents.
The Housing Authority's intent was to erect "a splendid barrier against the
encroachment of colored" residents into the nearby predominantly white Bolton
Hill neighborhood. See Plaintiffs' Statement of Material Facts Submitted in
Support of Their Pre-Trial Memorandum at 37-41, Thompson v. U.S. Dep't of Hous.
& Urban Dev., 348 F. Supp. 2d 398 (N.D. Md. 2005) (No. CIV. A. MJG-95-309),
http://www.aclumd.org/uploaded_files/0000/0169/statementoffacts.pdf
[http://perma.cc/8U8Y-2VGJ].





n199  See, e.g., Matthew Desmond, Eviction and the Reproduction of Urban Poverty
, 118 AM. J. SOC. 88, 107 (2012); Steven M. Graves, Landscapes of Predation,
Landscapes of Neglect: A Location Analysis of Payday Lenders and Banks, 55 PROF.
GEOGRAPHER 303, 311 (2003); Rhonda Jones-Webb et al., Alcohol and Malt Liquor
Availability and Promotion and Homicide in Inner Cities, 43 SUBSTANCE USE &
MISUSE 159, 160 (2008).





n200  It is not clear whether there has been an actual shift in the average age
of Baltimore police officers in the eight years since Jamila was ten. However,
some police leaders claim that police officers have become, on average, younger
and newer to the force and thus have a more "millennial" approach to policing.
Zoe Mentel, Racial Reconciliation, Truth-Telling, and Police Legitimacy, U.S.
DEP'T JUST. 10-11 (2012),
http://nnscommunities.org/uploads/Racial-Reconciliation_Truth-Telling_and-Legiti
macy.pdf [http://perma.cc/XEL2-A3ES].





n201  Jamila's insight here is reminiscent of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial
Court's in 2016. See infra text accompanying notes 322-324.





n202  To some degree, this way of thinking could be attributable to the human
brain's tendency to recall negative information longer and more vividly than
positive information. See, e.g., Roy F. Baumeister et al., Bad Is Stronger than
Good, 5 REV. GEN. PSYCHOL. 323, 323-24 (2001).





n203  All quotations attributed to Myron were recorded during an interview
conducted by Kaitlin Edin-Nelson and Geena St. Andrew on August 4, 2015.





n204  All quotations attributed to Johnson were recorded during an interview
conducted by Geena St. Andrew and Juliana Wittman on August 4, 2015.





n205  Silent[#xF3], Watch Me (Whip/Nae Nae), YOUTUBE (June 15, 2015),
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjW8wmF5VWc [http://perma.cc/QV7D-MS4Q].





n206  See, e.g., Katie Mettler, Tampa Police Officers 'Whip' and 'Nae Nae' with
Sulphur Springs Youth on Halloween, TAMPA BAY TIMES: BAY BUZZ (Nov. 2, 2015,
11:14 AM),
http://www.tampabay.com/blogs/baybuzz/tampa-police-officers-whip-and-nae-nae-wit
h-sulphur-springs-youth-on/2252272 [http://perma.cc/EE58-MQ6Y]; Perry Stein, AD.
C. Cop Tried To Break up a Group of Teens. It Ended in This Impressive Dance-Off
, WASH. POST (Oct. 28, 2015),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/local/wp/2015/10/28/a-d-c-cop-tried-to-break-
up-a-group-of-teens-it-ended-in-this-impressive-dance-off
[http://perma.cc/7NW-58G5]; Lyndsay Winkley, Watch Officer Whip, Whip, Then
Watch Him Nae Nae, SAN DIEGO UNION-TRIB. (Oct. 7, 2015),
http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-police-officer-whip-nae-nae-facebook-vi
deo-20150cto7-htmlstory.html [http://perma.cc/S847-GDQ8].





n207  For example, Jeff Fagan and Tom Tyler find that most contextual variables,
including having deviant peers, are not associated with adolescents' assessments
of legal legitimacy. Fagan & Tyler, supra note 136, at 231-33. However, the
survey and analytical method used by Fagan and Tyler provides a quite limited
way of understanding how networks produce perceptions of the law and law
enforcement officials.





n208  Baumeister et al., supra note 202, at 323.





n209  See, e.g., Brunson & Weitzer, supra note 177, at 426.





n210  E.g., BALKIN, supra note 186, at 67-73 (on memes); HALBWACHS, supra note
188, at 54-83 (on family).





n211  E.g., PETER L. BERGER & THOMAS LUCKMANN, THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF
REALITY (1966).





n212  Some scholars understand unequal distribution of policing quality as a
Rawlsian distributive justice problem. See Nirej S. Sekhon, Redistributive
Policing, 101 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 1171 (2012).





n213  Cf. Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, Rethinking Racism: Toward a Structural
Interpretation, 62 AM. SOC. REV. 465, 475 (1997) (arguing that one advantage of
a structural framework for studying race issues is that "[r]acial phenomena are
regarded as a 'normal' outcome of the racial structure of a society").





n214  See, e.g., BONILLA-SILVA, supra note 105, at 170-72 (arguing that
colorblind ideology indirectly affects many African Americans' explanations of
social problems and policy perspectives even as they tend to perceive
discrimination more readily than whites do); MATTHEW DESMOND, EVICTED: POVERTY
AND PROFIT IN THE AMERICAN CITY 179-82 & 179 n.2 (2016) (explaining that many
poor people do not organize against inequality because, in line with the
dominant cultural perspective on the causes of poverty, "[n]o one thought the
poor more undeserving than the poor themselves"); Russell K. Robinson,
Perceptual Segregation, 108 COLUM. L. REV. 1093, 1142-46 (2008) (citing a large
body of social psychology research to explain that social "outsiders," such as
women and racial/ethnic minorities, "tend to avoid attributing adverse treatment
to discrimination unless such attributions are very difficult to avoid").





n215  See 1 WEBER, supra note 77, at 43-46, 339-48; 2 MAX WEBER, ECONOMY AND
SOCIETY: AN OUTLINE OF INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY 926-55 (Guenther Roth & Claus
Wittich eds., Ephraim Fischoff et al. trans., Univ. of Cal. Press 1978) (1922);
Frank Parkin, Strategies of Social Closure in Class Formation, in THE SOCIAL
ANALYSIS OF CLASS STRUCTURE 1 (Frank Parkin ed., 1974).





n216  Several scholars and commentators have noted the paradox of overpolicing
and underprotection in racially and socioeconomically marginalized communities.
E.g., JILL LEOVY, GHETTOSIDE 9 (2015) ("[O]ur criminal justice system . . . is
at once oppressive and inadequate."); Haney L[#xF3]pez, supra note 105, at 1054;
Natapoff, supra note 55, at 1718-19.





n217  See Lo[#xEF]c Wacquant, A Janus-Faced Institution of Ethnoracial Closure:
A Sociological Specification of the Ghetto, in THE GHETTO: CONTEMPORARY GLOBAL
ISSUES AND CONTROVERSIES 1, 2 (Ray Hutchison & Bruce D. Haynes eds., 2012)
(describing racially and socioeconomically marginalized neighborhoods as the
product of a relational "power asymmetry").





n218  See, e.g., ANDERSON, supra note 124, at 34; PHILIPPE BOURGOIS, IN SEARCH
OF RESPECT 109-13 (2d ed. 2003); ALICE GOFFMAN, ON THE RUN 2 (2014); RANDALL
KENNEDY, RACE, CRIME, AND THE LAW 29-75 (1997); SUDHIR ALLADI VENKATESH, OFF THE
BOOKS: THE UNDERGROUND ECONOMY OF THE URBAN POOR 280 (2006) ("Though life on the
street was changing in many worrying ways, one thing remained consistent. For
nearly a century, black Chicagoans had never been able to rely on law
enforcement, be it for gang- or nongang-related problems.").





n219  See, e.g., Donald Black, Crime as Social Control, 48 AM. SOC. REV. 34, 36
(1983) (describing homicide as private capital punishment); Kirk & Papachristos,
supra note 9, at 1203-04; Daryl J. Levinson, Collective Sanctions, 56 STAN. L.
REV. 345, 386 (2003).





n220  SUDHIR ALLADI VENKATESH, AMERICAN PROJECT: THE RISE AND FALL OF A MODERN
GHETTO 77-83 (2000).





n221  See Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh & Steven Levitt, "Are We a Family or a
Business?" History and Disjuncture in the Urban American Street Gang, 29 THEORY
& SOC'Y 427 (2000) (describing the metamorphosis of Chicago street gangs from
primarily social groups that committed petty crimes to primarily criminal
financial enterprises).





n222  VENKATESH, supra note 218, at 177-87 (describing the relationship between
one Chicago street and the neighborhood it controlled).





n223  Id. at 125-47.





n224  The era of proactive policing is relatively young, really beginning with
the advent of broken-windows policing in the early 1980s. See Kelling & Wilson,
supra note 36; see also Meares, Broken Windows, supra note 98 (discussing the
effectiveness of broken-windows policing).





n225  See, e.g., KENNEDY, supra note 218, at 29-75; Alice Goffman, On the Run:
Wanted Men in a Philadelphia Ghetto, 74 AM. SOC. REV. 339, 340-41 (2009).





n226  MICHAEL JAVEN FORTNER, BLACK SILENT MAJORITY 7-9 (2015).





n227  See, e.g., PRESIDENT'S COMM'N ON LAW ENF'T & ADMIN. OF JUSTICE, THE
CHALLENGE OF CRIME IN A FREE SOCIETY 25-26, 106 (1967); Tracey L. Meares &
Bernard E. Harcourt, Foreword: Transparent Adjudication and Social Science
Research in Constitutional Criminal Procedure, 90 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 733,
773 (2000).





n228  E.g., GARLAND, supra note 16, at 114-15; Albert J. Reiss, Jr., Police
Organization in the Twentieth Century, 15 CRIME & JUST. 51, 58 (1992).





n229  See ALEXANDER, supra note 3, at 188-89; FORTNER, supra note 226, at
258-60; James Forman, Jr., Racial Critiques of Mass Incarceration: Beyond the
New Jim Crow, 87 N.Y.U. L. REV. 21, 35-36 (2012).





n230  RADLEY BALKO, RISE OF THE WARRIOR COP 157 (2013); Peter B. Kraska & Victor
E. Kappeler, Militarizing American Police: The Rise and Normalization of
Paramilitary Units, 44 SOC. PROBS. 1, 6-9 (1997).





n231  See Fagan & Geller, supra note 101, at 79-81 (arguing that, between 1998
and 2011, New York City police officers began forming suspicion based on
neighborhood characteristics rather than making individualized assessments based
on suspects' behavior); Meares, supra note 16, at 162 (arguing that Terry
concerned a stop based on suspicion of an individual, as opposed to stops based
on generalized suspicion, as part of a "program" to regulate young African
American and Latino men).





n232  E.g., ANDERSON, supra note 124, at 47; GOFFMAN, supra note 218, at 175.





n233  Patrick J. Carr, Laura Napolitano & Jessica Keating, We Never Call the
Cops and Here Is Why: A Qualitative Examination of Legal Cynicism in Three
Philadelphia Neighborhoods, 45 CRIMINOLOGY 445, 461-63 (2007).





n234  See also Carol Steiker, More Wrong than Rights, in TRACEY L. MEARES & DAN
M. KAHAN, URGENT TIMES: POLICING AND RIGHTS IN INNER-CITY COMMUNITIES 49, 51
(1999) (analogizing the conditions of inner-city residents who supported
order-maintenance policing in the 1990s to a swimmer drowning in the sea: "In
dire straits, and with limited options, [inner-city residents] will grasp at any
rope, no matter how steep the price."). Pierre Bourdieu encapsulated this idea
in his concept of habitus, the idea that while individuals have agency in
thought and action, thoughts and actions are nonetheless deeply embedded in
social structure. People's perceptions and opinions both represent and reproduce
existing social conditions. PIERRE BOURDIEU, DISTINCTION: A SOCIAL CRITIQUE OF
THE JUDGMENT OF TASTE 170-72 (Richard Nice trans., Harvard Univ. Press 1984)
(1979).





n235  Carr, Napolitano & Keating, supra note 233, at 467-69.





n236  All quotations attributed to Lemuel were recorded during an interview
conducted by Geena St. Andrew and Janice Bonsu on July 2, 2015.





n237  Indeed, most youth, even in disadvantaged urban communities, are generally
law-abiding. See James Forman, Jr., Community Policing & Youth as Assets, 95 J.
CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 1, 26-28 (2004).





n238  See Gus G. Sentementes & Julie Bykowicz, Questions Raised for Years About
City "Flex Squad," BALT. SUN (Jan. 15, 2006),
http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2006-01-15/news/0601150112_1_squad-flex-mengel
[http://perma.cc/HUH5-PD66].





n239  See sources cited supra note 227.





n240  Lemuel is convinced that African American officers in Baltimore are more
abusive than white officers. "Black cops are the worst ones," he declared. His
observation mirrors that of The Wire creator and author David Simon and former
Baltimore police officer Edward Burns: "[T]oday, it's a new generation of young
black officers that is proving itself violently aggressive. A white patrolman in
West Baltimore has to at least take into account the racial imagery . . . . Not
so his black counterparts, for whom brutality complaints can be shrugged of--not
only because the victim was a corner-dwelling fiend, but because the racial
aspect is neutralized." DAVID A. SIMON & EDWARD BURNS, THE CORNER 165 (1997);
see also Robert A. Brown & James Frank, Race and Officer Decision Making:
Examining Differences in Arrest Outcomes Between Black and White Officers, 23
JUST. Q. 96, 120 (2006) (finding that, although white officers decide to arrest
more frequently than black officers do, black officer-black suspect encounters
were more likely to lead to arrest than any other officer-suspect combination);
Rod K. Brunson & Jacinta M. Gau, Officer Race Versus Macro-Level Context: A Test
of Competing Hypotheses About Black Citizens' Experiences with and Perceptions
of Black Police Officers, 61 CRIME & DELINQ. 213, 233-34 (2015) (arguing that
urban African Americans' perceptions of the police are not significantly
different based on the racial composition of the force); Ivan Y. Sun & Brian K.
Payne, Racial Differences in Resolving Conflicts: A Comparison Between Black and
White Police Officers, 50 CRIME & DELINQ. 516, 534-36 (2004) (finding that black
officers are more likely to use coercive techniques than white officers). But
see Joshua C. Cochran & Patricia Y. Warren, Racial, Ethnic, and Gender
Differences in Perceptions of the Police: The Salience of Officer Race Within
the Context of Racial Profiling, 28 J. CONTEMP. CRIM. JUST. 206, 219, 221 (2012)
(finding that black citizens were more likely to view an officer as behaving
legitimately if the officer was black and arguing that greater minority
representation on police forces might improve perceptions of policing among
African Americans); David Eitle, Lisa Stolzenberg & Stewart J. D'Alessio, Police
Organizational Factors, the Racial Composition of the Police, and the
Probability of Arrest, 22 JUST. Q. 30, 54 (2005) (associating greater minority
representation on police forces with increased use of community policing
practices). Baltimore's population is 63% African American; its police force is
44% African American. Jeremy Ashkenas & Haeyoun Park, The Race Gap in America's
Police Departments, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 8, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/09/03/us/the-race-gap-in-americas-police
-departments.html [http://perma.cc/MKH9-D8RE]. These observations highlight a
potential shortcoming of reform efforts aimed at diversifying police
departments. While officer diversity is surely a positive goal, diversification
without department-wide cultural change is unlikely to meaningfully improve the
experience of police presence in poor and African American communities. See
David Alan Sklansky, Not Your Father's Police Department: Making Sense of the
New Demographics of Law Enforcement, 96 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 1209, 1242
(2006) (calling the increased diversity of some urban police forces an
"incomplete revolution").





n241  Security concerns at Baltimore high schools led the city to establish a
separate school policing unit, the Baltimore City School Police Force, in 1967.
The statute that authorizes the School Police Force specifies that its officers
may only carry their service weapons onto campuses when school is out of
session. MD. CODE ANN., EDUC. § 4-318(d)(3) (Lexis 2016). In 2015, the Baltimore
school system's CEO and Baltimore school police led a massive legislative and
public advocacy campaign to remove this prohibition. See H.B. 101, 2015 Leg.
Reg. Sess. (Md. 2015); Erica L. Green, School Police Plead To Resurrect Weapons
Bill, BALT. SUN (Mar. 16, 2015, 10:49 PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/baltimore-city/bs-md-ci-school-weapons
-20150316-story.html [http://perma.cc/82Z7-K445]. The city held several
listening sessions at high schools and public libraries in the summer after the
bill failed, one of which I attended while conducting field research (July 17,
2015, Forest Park High School). The overwhelming majority of meeting
participants-mostly parents of Baltimore high school students or community
activists who seemed to have friendly preexisting relationships with the school
police-spoke in favor of permitting Baltimore school police officers to carry
guns in school buildings. For now, the law is unchanged.





n242  In March 2016, after a cellphone video surfaced that showed a Baltimore
school officer aggressively slapping and kicking a teen boy, the training and
recruitment of Baltimore school police officers garnered new attention from
school officials. Tim Prudente, Baltimore Schools CEO Will Review Officer
Training, Selection After Slapping Incident, BALT. SUN (Mar. 8, 2016, 1:30 PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/baltimore-city/bs-md-ci-community-meet
ing-reach-20160307-story.html [http://perma.cc/U7TX-QQ7H]. Lemuel's alleged
assault occurred years before videotaping emerged as a response to harsh police
tactics.





n243  For example, one young man who resides primarily in Northwest Baltimore's
Park Heights neighborhood said that there are so many cars on every corner in
that neighborhood that he constantly feels that he is being watched: "I'll go up
to Park Heights and every corner I go to I'm going to see a police car. I'm not
trying to say that's a bad thing . . . . I'm not even saying a cop is watching,
but when you see a police car, eventually that's somebody saying you're being
watched, for real. That's how I feel. And I guess that's how people see it when
they see a cop car. It's like they're being watched." This quote was recorded
during an interview conducted by Kaitlin Edin-Nelson and Janice Bonsu on June
24, 2015.





n244  One young woman discussing the same neighborhood said that it takes the
police about twenty-five minutes to arrive when someone calls about a murder,
accident, or other major event despite their common presence:


     Geena: I heard you say earlier that a situation has to be "serious"
     before you call the police. What kind of situation would that be?

     Respondent: Like murder or a robbery, accident, somebody being
     injured. Not just a little dispute or fuss. Somebody that has [an]
     injury or someone in trouble.

     Geena: How long would the police take to respond and get there?
     Respondent: I don't know. I think like twenty-five minutes . . .
     unless they're in the area and they just got called over.

        * * *

     Monica: Do you see the police around a lot? Like you said, "Unless
     they're in the area"--are they in the areas where you are that much?

     Respondent: Ye ah, they do, because I live right up the street from
     the police station, so they just be around.


This conversation was recorded during an interview conducted by Geena St. Andrew
and the author on July 22, 2015.





n245  Bykowicz, supra note 150; Sentementes & Bykowicz, supra note 238.





n246  See supra notes 145-150 and accompanying text.





n247  See Radley Balko, An Interview with the Baltimore Cop Who's Revealing All
the Horrible Things He Saw on the Job, WASH. POST (June 25, 2015),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-watch/wp/2015/06/25/an-interview-with-the
-baltimore-cop-whos-revealing-all-the-horrible-things-he-saw-on-the-job
[http://perma.cc/87G8-QH6L] (describing street enforcement unit bad behavior
during raids, such as urinating or defecating on the belongings of suspects and
their housemates).





n248  See Rachel Harmon, Why Arrest?, 115 MICH. L. REV. 307, 308 (2016) (calling
arrest the "paradigmatic police activity"); Wayne A. Logan, After the Cheering
Stopped: Decriminalization and Legalism's Limits, 24 CORNELL J.L. & PUB. POL'Y
319, 331-35 (2014). See generally Elina Treyger, Collateral Incentives To Arrest
, 63 KAN. L. REV. 557 (2015) (critiquing indirect incentives to arrest and
resultant systemic distortions).





n249  Ema O'Connor, A Former Baltimore Police Officer Exposed His Department's
Corruption, BUZZFEED NEWS (June 30, 2015, 12:57 PM)
http://www.buzzfeed.com/emaoconnor/baltimore-police-officer-tweets-up
[http://perma.cc/6W2G-BMWU].





n250  See, e.g., Eisha Jain, Arrests as Regulation, 67 STAN. L. REV. 809, 819
(2015); Kohler-Hausmann, supra note 16; Alexandra Natapoff, Misdemeanor
Decriminalization, 68 VAND. L. REV. 1055, 1057-58 (2015).





n251  See Pierre Bourdieu, The Forms of Capital, in HANDBOOK OF THEORY AND
RESEARCH FOR THE SOCIOLOGY OF EDUCATION 241 (John Richardson ed., 1986).





n252  See e.g., Tyler & Fagan, supra note 8; Sunshine & Tyler, supra note 9.





n253  See e.g., BERNARD E. HARCOURT, ILLUSION OF ORDER: THE FALSE PROMISE OF
BROKEN WINDOWS POLICING 46-47 (2009) (explaining that the "community policing"
label has been applied to systems that use directly opposing strategies,
including broken-windows policing and stop-and-frisk, and thus avoiding the
term); GEORGE L. KELLING & CATHERINE M. COLES, FIXING BROKEN WINDOWS 158 (1997)
(noting that "community policing has come to mean all things to all people" and
declaring that the changes in New York City's policing strategies during the
Giuliani era "are congruent with the basic elements of community policing");
Seth W. Stoughton, Principled Policing: Warrior Cops and Guardian Officers, 51
WAKE FOREST L. REV. 611, 628 (2016) (arguing that "[t]he absence of a functional
definition of community policing" led to inevitable implementation challenges
and department resistance).





n254  The distinction between legitimacy and legal estrangement is analogous to
the distinction between ideological and structural understandings of racism. As
Eduardo Bonilla-Silva explains, "Most analysts regard racism as a matter of
individuals subscribing to an irrational view, thus the cure is educating them
to realize that racism is wrong . . . . The alternative theorization offered
here implies that because the phenomenon has structural consequences for the
races, the only way to 'cure' society of racism is by eliminating its systemic
roots." Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, supra note 213, at 476. Along similar lines,
legal estrangement demands a structural response, while legitimacy theory
ultimately implies that an education-based approach, focused on changing the
behavior of a few bad actors, is sufficient to cure the problem of policing.





n255  See, e.g., A Vision for Black Lives: Policy Demands for Black Power,
Freedom & Justice, MOVEMENT FOR BLACK LIVES 3-4 (July 2016),
http://policy.m4bl.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/20160726-m4bl-Vision-Booklet-V
3.pdf [http://perma.cc/488M-NWUF]; Forward Through Ferguson: A Path To ward
Racial Equity, FERGUSON COMMISSION, 15-17 (Oct. 14, 2015),
http://3680or2khmk3bzkp33juiea1.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/
09/101415_FergusonCommissionReport.pdf [http://perma.cc/R32G-76LX] (framing the
problem that gave rise to the death of Michael Brown as a problem of
police-citizen relations, municipal court and local governance, child well-being
and education, lack of economic opportunity, and racial inequity); cf. Ta-Nehisi
Coates, The Myth of Police Reform, ATLANTIC (Apr. 15, 2015),
http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/04/the-myth-of-police-reform/39
0057 [http://perma.cc/8XJN-P9J6] ("A reform that begins with the officer on the
beat is not reform at all.").





n256  See GOTTSCHALK, supra note 3, at 258-59 (critiquing the paralysis that
results from the "root causes" perspective in advocacy against mass
incarceration).





n257  Sampson & Bartusch, supra note 9, at 778.





n258  Capers, supra note 153, at 60-77.





n259  See DEVAH PAGER, MARKED 16 (2007).





n260  See, e.g., RIOS, supra note 126, at 36; Becky Pettit & Bruce We stern,
Mass Imprisonment and the Life Course: Race and Class Inequality in U.S.
Incarceration, 69 AM. SOC. REV. 151, 151





n261  See Rachel A. Harmon, Federal Programs and the Real Costs of Policing, 90
N.Y.U. L. REV. 870, 876-77, 879-84 (2015).





n262  See, e.g., Andrew Manuel Crespo, Systemic Facts: Toward Institutional
Awareness in Criminal Courts, 129 HARV. L. REV. 2049, 2057-65 (2016) (critiquing
the "administrativist turn" in scholarship on police regulation and arguing for
a robust role for local criminal courts); Joanna C. Schwartz, Who Can Police the
Police?, 2016 U. CHI. LEGAL F. 437, 437 (introducing a framework for thinking
about which actors are best suited to pursue police reform).





n263  Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Pub. L. No.
103-322, § 210401(a), 108 Stat. 1796, 2071 (codified at 42 U.S.C. § 14141).





n264  See, e.g., Stephen Rushin, Structural Reform Litigation in American Police
Departments, 99 MINN. L. REV. 1343, 1359-63 (2015).





n265  E.g., Myriam E. Gilles, Reinventing Structural Reform Litigation:
Deputizing Private Citizens in the Enforcement of Civil Rights, 100 COLUM. L.
REV. 1384, 1417-18 (2000) (arguing that the statute should permit the DOJ to
deputize private citizens to bring pattern or practice suits against police
departments if the government has declined to do so); Harmon, supra note 2, at 4
(proposing more aggressive DOJ pursuit of section 14141 lawsuits and a safe
harbor from lawsuit for police departments that voluntarily reform); Stephen
Rushin, Using Data To Reduce Police Violence, 57 B.C. L. REV. 117, 154-66 (2016)
(arguing that data availability on civilian deaths caused by law enforcement
could increase the effectiveness of section 14141); Kami Chavis Simmons, The
Politics of Policing: Ensuring Stakeholder Collaboration in the Federal Reform
of Local Law Enforcement Agencies, 98 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 489, 494 (2008)
(arguing that the DOJ should use a different deliberation model in reform
efforts it instigates pursuant to section 14141).





n266  See Harmon, supra note 2, at 3-4; Stephen Rushin, Federal Enforcement of
Police Reform, 82 FORDHAM L. REV. 3189, 3232-33 (2014).





n267  See POLICE EXEC. RESEARCH FORUM, CIVIL RIGHTS INVESTIGATIONS OF LOCAL
POLICE: LESSONS LEARNED 4 (2013); Simmons, supra note 265, at 493 ("[G]overnment
officials have expressly articulated a preference for avoiding litigation and
negotiating with municipalities to ensure compliance with the suggested
reforms.").





n268  Conduct of Law Enforcement Agencies, U.S. DEP'T JUST. (June 2, 2016),
http://www.justice.gov/crt/conduct-law-enforcement-agencies
[http://perma.cc/LBR2-V6ZR].





n269  See Brian A. Reaves, Local Police Departments, 2013: Personnel, Policies,
and Practices, U.S. DEP'T JUST. 1 (May 2015),
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/lpd13ppp.pdf [http://perma.cc/4NHA-ZFGZ].
While there is no direct evidence to suggest that the Obama Administration is
underproducing section 14141 investigations, other scholars have written about
the inherent barriers to initiating section 14141 actions even if a given
administration is more willing to use that tool. See, e.g., Rachel Harmon,
Limited Leverage: Federal Remedies and Policing Reform, 32 ST. LOUIS U. PUB. L.
REV. 33, 44 (2012) ("Assuming even a small minority of [police departments] is
engaged in a pattern or practice of constitutional violations, the Department of
Justice cannot achieve national reform by suing every department with a pattern
of widespread constitutional violations."); Harmon, supra note 2, at 21-22;
Sunita Patel, Toward Democratic Police Reform: A Vision for "Community
Engagement" Provisions in DOJ Consent Decrees, 51 WAKE FOREST L.REV. 793, 812-14
(2016).





n270  DOJ BALTIMORE REPORT, supra note 156, at 85-87.





n271  See supra note 137 and accompanying text.





n272  DOJ BALTIMORE REPORT, supra note 156, at 72-73; see also 42 U.S.C § 2000d
to d-7 (2012) (barring race, color, and national origin discrimination in
federally assisted programs, which includes the Baltimore Police Department
because of the funding it receives from the federal Community Oriented Policing
Services agency); Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C.
§ 3789d (2012) (providing the federal government a tool to force local policy
departments to eliminate structurally exclusive policies); 28 C.F.R. § 42.203
(2010) (barring programs that receive federal funding from the Justice System
Improvement Act or Juvenile Justice Act from using practices that discriminate
on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, or gender unless
necessary).





n273  TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6, at 12.





n274  DOJ BALTIMOR EREPORT, supra note 156, at 72.





n275  See, e.g., Harmon, supra note 95, at 802; Seth W. Stoughton, The
Incidental Regulation of Policing, 98 MINN. L. REV. 2179, 2182 (2014); see also
Orin S. Kerr, The Fourth Amendment and New Technologies: Constitutional Myths
and the Case for Caution, 102 MICH. L. REV. 801, 855 (2004) (explaining that
wiretapping tends to be regulated by statute more than by Fourth Amendment
jurisprudence); Erin Murphy, The Politics of Privacy in the Criminal Justice
System: Information Disclosure, the Fourth Amendment, and Statutory Law
Enforcement Exemptions, 111 MICH. L. REV. 485, 535-37 (2013) (comparing courts
and political processes in their ability to protect privacy).





n276  Seth Freed Wessler, Police Pay Gap: Many of America's Finest Struggle on
Poverty Wages, NBC NEWS (Oct. 26, 2014),
http://www.nbcnews.com/feature/in-plain-sight/police-pay-gap-many-americas-fines
t-struggle-poverty-wages-n232701 [http://perma.cc/33V8-62PE].





n277  United States v. City of Ferguson, No. 4:16-cv-000180, at 65 (E.D. Mo.
Mar. 17, 2016) (consent decree).





n278  Seth W. Stoughton, Moonlighting: The Private Employment of Off-Duty
Officers, 2017 U. ILL. L. REV. (forthcoming).





n279  Joce Sterman, ABC2 Investigators Find Highest Paid City Employees Are
Everyday Police Officers, ABC 2 NEWS (Oct. 3, 2013, 9:01 PM),
http://www.abc2news.com/news/local-news/investigations/abc2-investigators-find-h
ighest-paid-city-employees-are-everyday-police-officers
[http://perma.cc/V2RS-P96D].





n280  Sean Welsh, Top Baltimore City Salaries for 2015, BALT. SUN (July 30,
2015, 6:19 PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/baltimore-city/bal-10-highest-baltimor
e-city-salaries-for-2015-20150730-story.html [http://perma.cc/S878-UGC5].





n281  According to the city salary database, gross salary includes overtime,
furloughs, and adjustments, and it does not include any compensation for "comp
time" or leave time. It thus seems highly likely that the lieutenant's pay is
largely attributable to overtime. See Baltimore City Employee Salaries FY2015,
OPEN BALT.,
http://data.baltimorecity.gov/City-Government/Baltimore-City-Employee-Salaries-F
Y2015/nsfe-bg53 [http://perma.cc/6RZC-28MD]. Note that the city did pay out more
than expected in FY 2015 overtime in part because of the Freddie Gray response
and subsequent spike in crime. Kevin Rector, Baltimore Police Shifting Officers
To Rein in Overtime Costs Amid Historic Year, BALT. SUN (Apr. 8, 2016, 9:04 PM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/bs-md-ci-police-overtime-2016040
8-story.html [http://perma.cc/5AGC-P9JK].





n282  See TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6, at 65.





n283  Id. at 61-68.





n284  Id. at 65.





n285  See Michael E. Walleman, Seniority Rights, 77 POLICE CHIEF 32 (2010).





n286  Id.





n287  See Michelle Wilde Anderson, The New Minimal Cities, 123 YALE L.J. 1118,
1120-21 (2014).





n288  Jihong "Solomon" Zhao, Matthew C. Scheider & Quint Thuman, Funding
Community Policing To Reduce Crime: Have COPS Grants Made a Difference?, 2
CRIMINOLOGY & PUB. POL'Y 7, 9 (2002).





n289  H.R. 1384, 119th Gen. Assemb., 2d Reg. Sess. (Ind. 2016).





n290  For instance, the Dallas Police Department receives payment from
neighborhood associations in exchange for special patrolling and related
services. The number of hours and array of services varies based on the amount
of money the association raises. See Naomi Martin, As More Dallas Neighborhoods
Pay for Extra Patrols, Some Question Fairness, DALL. MORNING NEWS (Oct. 25,
2015), http://www.dallasnews.com/news/crime/headlines/20151025
-as-more-dallas-neighborhoods-pay-for-extra-patrols-some-question-fairness.ece
[http://perma.cc/FA9G-E2ED].





n291  Civil Rights Div., Investigation of the New Orleans Police Department,
U.S. DEP'T JUST. 73 (Mar. 16, 2011) [hereinafter DOJ NEW ORLEANS REPORT],
http://nolaipm.gov/main/uploads/File/All/doj_report_110317.pdf
[http://perma.cc/9SXB-5JWB].





n292  Id. at 69-75.





n293  Id. at 73.





n294  Some have expressed concerns about these arrangements. For example, the
Auditor of the City of San Jose, California issued a report in 2012 stating that
"urgent reform and a cultural change" are needed in the off-duty employment
program and expressed a concern about "inequities," though the specific concern
was that there would be inequities among officers rather than unequal effects on
the community. OFFICE OF THE CITY AUDITOR, POLICE DEPARTMENT SECONDARY
EMPLOYMENT: URGENT REFORM AND A CULTURAL CHANGE NEEDED TO GAIN CONTROL OF
OFF-DUTY POLICE WORK 13 (2012); see also STEVE TOPRANI, PITTSBURGH BUREAU OF
POLICE, OUTSIDE AND UNMANAGED EMPLOYMENT: A REPORT DETAILING EXISTING POLICIES
AND RECOMMENDING REFORMS (2014) (describing various police departments'
approaches to the governance of secondary employment).





n295  United States v. City of New Orleans, No. 12-1924 (E.D. La. Jan. 11, 2013)
(consent decree).





n296  DOJ NEW ORLEANS REPORT, supra note 291, at 74-75. Although the New Orleans
system has been restructured, critics claim that it remains burdened with
favoritism and inequality. David Hammer & John Simerman, Despite Reforms, NOPD
Officers Still Keep Details for Themselves, WWL-TV (Feb. 10, 2015, 10:49 PM),
http://legacy.wwltv.com/story/news/local/investigations/david-hammer/2015/02/10/
despite-reforms-nopd-officers-still-keep-details-for-themselves/23212303
[http://perma.cc/4Z92-EU9K].





n297  See, e.g., Jessica Lee, Seattle Neighborhoods Hire Private Security Amid
"Blatant Lawlessness," SEATTLE TIMES (Jan. 23, 2016, 8:44 PM),
http://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/citizen-anti-crime-movement-afoot-in-se
attles-neighborhoods [http://perma.cc/8ADP-HDBS].





n298  Joh, supra note 152, at 49.





n299  Reaves, supra note 269, at 1.





n300  GARLAND, supra note 16, at 169 ("[T]he stated purposes of police have
changed, sometimes quite dramatically, and new tactics increasingly define how
they deploy their resources. But studies of police budgets and working practices
suggest that the daily practices of most police forces have not changed so
drastically as this would suggest. And, moreover, these new priorities and
tactics have not, as yet, led to any basic reorganization of the police as a
public agency.").





n301  Alan Blinder, Rural Justice Focus of Ex-Police Chief's Murder Trial, N.Y.
TIMES (Jan. 7, 2015),
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/08/us/richard-combs-bernard-bailey-shooting-case.
html [http://perma.cc/GP2C-4HK8].





n302  See John Monk, Ex-Eutawville Chief Pleads Guilty to Lesser Charge, Will
Serve No Time for Killing Black Motorist, STATE (Sept. 1, 2015),
http://www.thestate.com/news/local/crime /article33213873.html
[http://perma.cc/HK6R-R4JV].





n303  Prosecutor: Death of Man Shot by Police Chief Was "Senseless," CBS NEWS
(Jan. 8, 2015, 3:41 PM),
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/richard-combs-case-prosecutor-death-of-man-shot-by-p
olice-chief-was-senseless [http://perma.cc/H3LY-A6H5].





n304  See, e.g., Timothy Williams, Cast-Out Police Officers Are Often Hired in
Other Cities, N.Y. TIMES (Sept. 10, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/11/us/whereabouts-of-cast-out-police-officers-oth
er-cities-often-hire-them.html [http://perma.cc/A39R-Q9ZG] (describing
departments' failure to screen previously fired officers as a factor
contributing to incidents of police misconduct). It is also worth noting that
there is no national database of police officers who have been fired or lost
their certification, in part because of police union opposition. Id.





n305  E.g., Dagney Faulk & D. Eric Schansberg, The Effects of City-County
Consolidation: A Review of the Recent Academic Literature, IND. POL'Y REV.
FOUND. 4 (Nov. 16, 2005),
http://www.in.gov/legislative/interim/committee/2005/committees/prelim/MCCC02.pd
f [http://perma.cc/2YPU-ZWLC]. But see Douglas Laycock, Voting with Your Feet Is
No Substitute for Constitutional Rights, 32 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 29, 31
(2009).





n306  See, e.g., Overcoming the Challenges and Creating a Regional Approach to
Policing in St. Louis City and County, POLICE EXECUTIVE RES. F. 40-42 (Apr. 30,
2015), http://www.policeforum.org/assets/stlouis.pdf
[http://perma.cc/V3LA-M8UW].





n307  See Mark Ernst, What Impact Will Consolidation of Police Services by Small
and Medium Size Police Agencies Have on Community Oriented Policing by the Year
2003?, CAL. COMMISSION ON PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS & TRAINING 2 (July 1994),
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/Digitization/151687NCJRS.pdf
[http://perma.cc/FA7W-CBMU] ("On the face of it, the concepts of community
oriented policing and consolidation of police services appear to be
diametrically opposed."); Stephen D. Mastrofski & James J. Willis, Police
Organization Continuity and Change: Into the Twenty-First Century, 39 CRIME &
JUST. 55, 62 (2010).





n308  For example, Cincinnati, Ohio, provides one of the most celebrated stories
of police restructuring done well. See, e.g., Alana Semuels, How To Fix a Broken
Police Department, ATLANTIC (May 28, 2015),
http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/05/cincinnati-police-reform/393
797 [http://perma.cc/M22E-KNZR]. The Cincinnati Police Department employs
roughly 1,000 sworn officers. About Police: Cincinnati Police Department, CITY
CINCINNATI, http://www.cincinnati-oh.gov/police/about-police
[http://perma.cc/4GYX-WYTW]. As noted above, one of the pitfalls of "community
policing" is its nonspecificity. See supra note 253 and accompanying text. Yet
the problem-oriented community policing model employed in Cincinnati seems to
offer a potential positive way forward.






n309  See Jeremy M. Wilson, Alexander Weiss & Clifford Grammich, Pathways to
Consolidation: Taking Stock of Transitions to Alternative Models of Police
Service, OFF. COMMUNITY ORIENTED POLICING SERVICES 3 (2015),
http://policeconsolidation.msu.edu/sites/default/files/PathwaysToConsolidationAl
ternativeModels.pdf [http://perma.cc/833U-2PVH].





n310  Id.





n311  On the conservative argument for reducing criminal justice spending,
including through cutting incarceration, see Statement of Principles, RIGHT ON
CRIME, http://rightoncrime.com/statement-of-principles
[http://perma.cc/C6M4-Xp3X] ("Conservatives are known for being tough on crime,
but we must also be tough on criminal justice spending. That means demanding
more cost-effective approaches that enhance public safety. A clear example is
our reliance on prisons . . . .").





n312  Meares, supra note 16, at 179.





n313  Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540 (S.D.N.Y. 2013) (finding
the New York City Police Department liable for a pattern and practice of racial
profiling and unconstitutional Terry stops).





n314  E.g., Wesley Lowery, Korryn Gaines, Cradling Child and Shotgun, Is Fatally
Shot by Police, WASH. POST (Aug. 2, 2016),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/08/02/korryn-gaines-is-th
e-ninth-black-woman-shot-and-killed-by-police-this-year
[http://perma.cc/7JMQ-U78W]. While some media focused on Gaines's actions as a
catalyst for the police response and her death, activists have claimed--more in
line with a legal estrangement perspective--that the officers' decision to fire
on Gaines when she was holding her five-year-old son was symbolic of their
devaluation of African American lives. From a legitimacy perspective, the fact
that Gaines was carrying a shotgun, which she allegedly fired, could be
relevant--officers can explain, in a seemingly neutral way, why they made the
decision to fire. From an estrangement perspective, regardless of whether the
officers' decision was objectively reasonable, it was subjectively unreasonable
and reproductive of the social exclusion of African Americans.





n315  One exception to this characterization is some of Tracey Meares's
scholarship. In particular, in a lecture on the legitimacy of police among young
African American men, Meares argues that legitimacy-based policing can build
trust between this population and the police. Meares, Legitimacy of Police,
supra note 98, at 666. Yet Meares notes that a core assumption of legitimacy
theory--that noncompliance with the law and law enforcement is attributable to a
lack of belief in the legitimacy of the law or law enforcement--may not be fully
supported in research, including her own. Id. The faultiness of this assumption,
particularly as applied to young African American men, calls into question
whether it is correct to assume that legitimacy-based policing will address this
group's perception of police marginalization.





n316  Utah v. Strieff, 136 S. Ct. 2056 (2016).





n317  Id. at 2059-60.





n318  Id. at 2060.





n319  See, e.g., Kaaryn Gustafson, The Criminalization of Poverty, 99 J. CRIM.
L. & CRIMINOLOGY 643, 667-68 (2009).





n320  517 U.S. 806, 813 (1996).





n321  426 U.S. 229 (1976); see also Paul Butler, The System Is Working the Way
It Is Supposed To: The Limits of Criminal Justice Reform, 104 GEO. L.J. 1419,
1453 (2016) (explaining the difficulty of challenging a pattern of
discriminatory arrests under the Equal Protection Clause).





n322  Commonwealth v. Warren, No. 11596, slip op. at 15-17 (Mass. Sept. 20,
2016); see also Commonwealth v. Mercado, 663 N.E.2d 243, 246 (Mass. 1996)
(concluding that "evasive behavior" is insufficient to support reasonable
individualized suspicion).





n323  Warren, slip op. at 15-19.





n324  Id. at 19.





n325  E.g., Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 767-69 (1966). But see Daniel
J. Meltzer, Deterring Constitutional Violations by Law Enforcement Officials:
Plaintiffs and Defendants as Private Attorneys General, 88 COLUM. L. REV. 247,
249-50 (1988) (suggesting that Fourth Amendment jurisprudence is aimed at
regulating bureaucratic actors as well as protecting individual rights).





n326  AKHIL REED AMAR, THE CONSTITUTION AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE: FIRST PRINCIPLES
37-39 (1997).





n327  Id. at 37.





n328  Friedman & Ponomarenko, supra note 83, at 1834-36.





n329  See, e.g., AMY E. LERMAN & VESLA M. WEAVER, ARRESTING CITIZENSHIP 142
(2014) (describing the asymmetric power orientation toward government that
arises from being subjected to the carceral state); KAY LEHMAN SCHLOZMAN, SIDNEY
VERBA & HENRY E. BRADY, THE UNHEAVENLY CHORUS: UNEQUAL POLITICAL VOICE AND THE
BROKEN PROMISE OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY 185, 312-46 (2012) (discussing education
and organized political action); Guy-Uriel E. Charles, Racial Identity,
Electoral Structures, and the First Amendment Right of Association, 91 CALIF. L.
REV. 1209, 1260-62 (2003).





n330  E.g., Charles A. Reich, The Law of the Planned Society, 75 YALE L.J. 1227,
1259-60 (1966); Mir iam Seifter, Second-Order Participation in Administrative
Law, 63 UCLA L. REV. 1300, 1333-52 (2016) (describing reliance on questionably
representative interest groups to ensure participation in administrative
rulemaking).





n331  Offering a more optimistic account, Friedman and Ponomarenko point to
national civil rights organizations, such as the NAACP and ACLU, along with more
regional and local groups, like churches, as giving voice to the disenfranchised
communities. Friedman & Ponomarenko, supra note 83, at 1789-80. However, given
what political sociology reveals about the processes through which community
groups often come to represent community interests, it might not be safe to
assume that large national organizations or community nonprofits are a reliable
channel for ensuring sufficient democratic voice in policing to root out legal
estrangement. See, e.g., Jeremy R. Levine, The Privatization of Political
Representation: Community-Based Organizations as Nonelected Neighborhood
Representatives, 81 AM. SOC. REV. 1251, 1268-72 (2016) (arguing that, although
community-based organizations help channel resources to under-resourced
neighborhoods, those resources may come at the cost of democratic
accountability).





n332  See Erik Luna, Transparent Policing, 85 IOWA L. REV. 1107, 1121-31 (2000)
(describing the democratic bases for increasing availability of governmental
information about policing).





n333  See Ill. Public Act 093-0209 (2003).





n334  See Edward McClelland, Barack Obama and Racial Profiling, NBC CHI. (July
18, 2013),
http://www.nbcchicago.com/blogs/ward-room/Barack-Obama-and-Racial-Profiling-2159
86531.html [http://perma.cc/QPP3-XL22].





n335  On organized copwatching, see generally Simonson, supra note 191.





n336  Zoe Mentel, Racial Reconciliation, Truth-Telling, and Police Legitimacy,
U.S. DEP'T JUST. 19-21 (2012),
http://nnscommunities.org/uploads/Racial-Reconciliation_Truth-Telling_and-Legiti
macy.pdf [http://pera.cc/TP5G-U4SJ]; Reconciliation, NAT'L INITIATIVE FOR
BUILDING COMMUNITY TR. & JUST.,
http://trustandjustice.org/resources/intervention/reconciliation
[http://perma.cc/NJ3B-TKUS].





n337  Reconciliation, supra note 336.





n338  See DAVID M. KENNEDY, DON'T SHOOT 83 (2011).





n339  Mustafa Emirbayer & Victoria Johnson, Bourdieu and Organizational Analysis
, 37 THEORY & SOC'Y 1, 32 (2008).





n340  See Jonathan Allen, Balancing Justice and Social Unity: Political Theory
and the Idea of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, 49 U. TORONTO L.J. 315,
319 (1999) ("Truth commissions are thought to play the symbolic role of making a
decisive break with the official sponsorship of human rights violations that
characterized the past."); see also MARTHA MINOW, BETWEEN VENGEANCE AND
FORGIVENESS: FACING HISTORY AFTER GENOCIDE AND MASS VIOLENCE 62 (1998)
(characterizing the truth commission as a possibility for healing and justice "
after periods of terror and violations of human rights" (emphasis added)).





n341  Andrew V. Papachristos, David M. Hureau & Anthony A. Braga, The Corner and
the Crew: The Influence of Geography and Social Networks on Gang Violence, 78
AM. SOC. REV. 417, 438 (2013).





n342  See, e.g., LO[#xCF]C WACQUANT, PUNISHING THE POOR: THE NEOLIBERAL
GOVERNMENT OF SOCIAL INSECURITY, at xx-xxii (2009); Coates, supra note 255
("Vexing social problems--homelessness, drug use, the inability to support one's
children, mental illness--are presently solved by sending in men and women who
specialize in inspiring fear and ensuring compliance."); Kohler-Hausmann, supra
note 16, at 691-92; Bruce Western, The Rehabilitation Paradox, NEW YORKER (May
9, 2016), http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/the-rehabilitation-paradox
[http://perma.cc/PT4M-E27B].





n343  See, e.g., Bell, supra note 42, at 332-34; Mary Fan, Street Diversion and
Decarceration, 50 AM. CRIM. L. REV. 165, 167-68 (2013); Sarah E. Waldeck, Cops,
Community Policing, and the Social Norms Approach to Crime Control: Should One
Make Us More Comfortable with the Others?, 34 GA. L. REV. 1253, 1299-1301
(2000).





n344  See GARLAND, supra note 16; see also Jessica Eaglin, The Drug Court
Paradigm, 53 AM. CRIM. L. REV. 595, 635 (2016) ("[D]rug courts may have
incentivized police and prosecutors to expand the number of individuals
processed within the system for drug offenses due to the well-meaning belief
that the justice system would offer better treatment."); Allegra McLeod,
Decarceration Courts: Possibilities and Perils of a Shifting Criminal Law, 100
GEO. L.J. 1587, 1619-20 (2012); Natapoff, supra note 250, at 1059.





n345  George Gasc[#xF3]n & Todd Foglesong, Making Policing More Affordable:
Managing Costs and Measuring Value in Policing, NAT'L INST. JUST. (Dec. 2010),
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/231096.pdf [http://perma.cc/9NTG-K986].





n346  See, e.g., Brady Dennis, Mark Berman & Elahe Izadi, Dallas Police Chief
Says 'We're Asking Cops To Do Too Much in this Country,' WASH. POST (July 11,
2016),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/07/11/grief-and-anger-con
tinue-after-dallas-attacks-and-police-shootings-as-debate-rages-over-policing
[http://perma.cc/X72P-7EFG]. This is not a new issue. See, e.g., ALBERT J.
REISS, JR., THE POLICE AND THE PUBLIC 63 (1972); Egon Bittner, Florence
Nightingale in Pursuit of Willie Sutton: A Theory of the Police, in THE
POTENTIAL FOR REFORM OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 17 (Herbert Jacob ed., 1974).





n347  See Camille A. Nelson, Racializing Disability, Disabling Race: Policing
Race and Mental Status, 15 BERKELEY J. CRIM. L. 1, 4-5 (2010) (introducing three
modalities of police interaction with the mentally ill).





n348  See Sarah Swan, Home Rules, 64 DUKE L.J. 823, 867 (2015).





n349  See BECKETT & HERBERT, supra note 16, at 12-14.





n350  See Wayne A. Logan, An Exception Swallows a Rule: Police Authority To
Search Incident to Arrest, 19 YALE L. & POL'Y REV. 381, 403 (2001).





n351  See MAX WEBER, Politics as a Vocation, in FROM MAX WEBER: ESSAYS IN
SOCIOLOGY (H.H. Gerth & C. Wright Mills eds. & trans., 1946) ("[A] state is a
human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of
physical force within a given territory.").





n352  Richard H. McAdams, Dhammika Dharmapala & Nuno Garoupa, The Law of Police,
82 U. CHI. L. REV. 135, 142-47 (2015).





n353  See generally Barbara E. Armacost, Organizational Culture & Police
Misconduct, 72 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 45 (2004) (arguing that the powerful culture
of police departments sets conditions that produce violent misconduct).





n354  See Canice Prendergrast, The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats, 97 AM.
ECON. REV. 180, 192 (2007); see also Richard H. McAdams, Dhammika Dharmapala &
Nuno Garoupa, Punitive Police? Agency Costs, Law Enforcement, and Criminal
Procedure (Coase-Sandor Inst. for Law & Econ., Working Paper No. 644, 2015),
http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics/642
[http://perma.cc/N2C8-GGFH].





n355  See TASK FORCE REPORT, supra note 6, at 1 ("Law enforcement culture should
embrace a guardian--rather than a warrior--mindset to build trust and legitimacy
both within agencies and with the public."); Sue Rahr & Stephen K. Rice, From
Warriors to Guardians: Recommitting American Police Culture to Democratic Ideals
, NAT'L INST. JUST. (Apr. 2015), http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/248654.pdf
[http://perma.cc/355P-JDJD]; Stoughton, supra note 253, at 612-14.


                               14 of 27 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright (c) 2017 Curators of the University of Missouri
                                UMKC Law Review

                                  Summer, 2017

                                UMKC Law Review

                              85 UMKC L. Rev. 953

LENGTH: 9270 words

ARTICLE: SMART CITIES POSE PRIVACY RISKS AND OTHER PROBLEMS, BUT THAT DOESN'T
MEAN WE SHOULDN'T BUILD THEM +




+ I wish to thank Rachel Cook, DeBrae Kennedy-Mayo, and Peter Swire for their
insightful comments. Any errors or omissions are my own.

NAME: Jesse W. Woo *

BIO:


* Jesse Woo is a research associate in privacy and cybersecurity at the Georgia
Institute of Technology where he works on privacy issues ranging from mutual
legal assistance to foreign intelligence law to smart cities and robotics. He is
a Georgia Tech Smart Cities Fellow and has written about open government data
and smart city privacy issues. Mr. Woo has previously worked as a researcher for
the University of Washington Tech Policy Lab and the Yale Internet and Society
Project and was a visiting scholar at the National Taiwan University Law School.
He is a graduate of the University of Washington School of Law.

 TEXT:
 [*953]  I. INTRODUCTION

   The potential benefits of smart city technologies are numerous. By becoming
"smart," a city can not only deliver more and better services with greater
efficiency, it can capture the cultural caché of the "tech-savvy" label. What
city leader would not want the economic growth that comes with a thriving
startup community? Everyone wants to be the next Silicon Valley or Seattle, and
these regions want to maintain their status as hot tech hubs. So smart city
initiatives race ahead in Pittsburgh, New York, Los Angeles, Kansas City,
Atlanta, and elsewhere, driving innovation to bring the American city into the
21st Century.  n1 However, privacy advocates are voicing concerns over some of
the privacy risks and other unintended consequences that can crop up with smart
city programs.

   The purpose of this essay is not to deny the benefits of smart city
initiatives or argue against their implementation. Rather, it seeks to help
policy makers avoid problems by identifying them early on, before they become
baked into smart city systems. It cautions them to adopt the "front page test"
when evaluating potential projects. To make this point, the essay posits
hypothetical headlines that distill the way privacy risks from smart cities can
capture the public's imagination. It also highlights common assumptions and
mistakes that give rise to these privacy and other risks and urges policy makers
to reframe the way they think about privacy and smart cities.

   The beauty of the smart cities movement is the diversity of ideas enabled by
the focus on locality. Cities all over the world are experimenting with novel
projects all the time, and no one person could chronicle all the potential
privacy risks. Rather than attempt the impossible, this essay hopes to impact
policy by identifying motivating examples and advocating a measured approach
where policy makers question the assumptions that lead to privacy risks and
enact  [*954]  strong structural safeguards to minimize those risks. Figure 1
previews the potential ways smart city privacy or other problems could manifest
on the front page (many inspired by real-life examples). The rest of the essay
is devoted to explaining, reframing, and preventing these issues.

   Part II of this essay establishes a working definition of a smart city. Part
III will attempt to highlight major privacy risks and other problems that can
result from smart city programs. Part IV will identify the assumptions and
mistakes that might lead to such problems. Finally, Part V will recommend both
legal controls in the form of use restrictions, and process controls in the form
of strong privacy assessments and structural reforms that model a set of best
practices.

Figure 1

PRIVACY PROBLEMS ON THE FRONT PAGE
DATA COLLECTION  "City planners want to put big brother on every street
                 corner, and in every pocket"

                 "City builds public Wi-Fi on the backs of the
                 disadvantaged poor"

                 "Hackers steal personal information of millions from city
                 data breach"

  DATA USE AND   "Attacker figured out stalking victim's location from
    CONTROL      public city database"

                 "City breaks promise not to reveal resident's personal
                 information"

                 "City prefers manipulation over legislation to control
                 citizen behavior"

  INEQUITY AND   "City Wi-Fi program discriminates against the poor and
 DISCRIMINATION  elderly"

                 "Predictive policing algorithm targets Blacks and
                 Latinos"

    [*955]  II. WHAT IS A SMART CITY?

   A smart city is one that integrates information and communication
technologies (ICTs) and the Internet of Things (IoT) to manage the city's assets
and delivery of services. City assets and services may include "local
departments' information systems, schools, libraries, transportation systems,
hospitals, power plants, law enforcement, and other community services."  n2
Essentially, smart cities seek to improve city life by gathering more data,
analyzing and processing that data, sharing it, and using it to deliver
services. A typical smart city initiative might include installation of
internet-connected sensors in public places, value-added services like free
Wi-Fi or public information kiosks, big data analytics of publicly held data, an
online portal through which to share municipal data, or some combination of the
above and more. These sorts of projects offer substantial benefits to cities and
their residents.

   A central plank of most smart city projects is the deployment of
internet-connected sensors to provide the city with the data it needs to be
smart. For example, in Kansas City, Sensity's LED streetlights not only consume
much less electricity than a traditional bulb, but have visual sensors that can
track when a vehicle is blocking the path of the new streetcar and alert
authorities to have it ticketed and removed. This system allows the city's
public transit to operate unimpeded. Other cities have systems to monitor
traffic flow or listen for gunshots and dispatch police.

   Sensors are not the only smart city tool, however. Many cities wish to use
technology to improve governance and streamline service delivery. Police
departments have tools that analyze crime patterns and can inform them where
crimes are likely to occur in the future, allowing for more efficient resource
allocation. A city might employ an app that lets citizens report potholes or
other road hazards for expedited repair. Some cities have gone even further by
experimenting with algorithmic decision-making in city services and programs.

   Municipal open data initiatives seek to share the data held by the city with
the public, generally through an online portal. The hope is that such data will
empower citizens to accomplish civic projects or allow business to better inform
their work. For example, advocacy groups might be able to track patterns of
discriminatory housing practices, or local entrepreneurs may build an app for
better real-time traffic updates.

   Value-added services are another publicly recognizable smart city benefit.
The most common of these services is free public Wi-Fi, but could also include
public kiosks that provide real-time information on events, restaurants, or
public transit. New York and Kansas City are leading the way with such kiosks.
[*956]  Clearly the rewards of a smart city are great, but such rewards also
come with risks. This essay's chief concerns are the risks posed to privacy and
civil liberties.

III. THE PROBLEM WITH SMART CITIES

   Just as the nature of smart city projects and their intended benefits are
diverse, so are the potential problems. They encompass multiple forms of privacy
and security risks as well as threats to civil liberties.

   A common concern is the increase in data collection that smart cities
naturally entail. If smart city sensors are deployed in public areas (which is
kind of the point), they potentially introduce government surveillance
technology into the public square at an unprecedented level. As the reaction to
the Snowden revelations demonstrates, the public can react quite strongly to
programs they interpret as unbridled government surveillance.

   The proliferation of sensors is not the only smart city problem, however. The
prospect of free public Wi-Fi is appealing to many, but sometimes the label
"free" doesn't fully account for the cost of the service when it entails turning
users into data subjects, and then monetizing them.  n3 Further, cities run the
risk of discrimination and disparate impact that can be entirely unintentional.
For example, transportation schemes that rely solely on smartphone hailed ride
sharing services could exclude elderly or homeless populations without access to
that technology.

   In many cases, the unforeseen consequences and burdens of a smart city
initiative will fall most heavily on the disadvantaged poor. Ubiquitous
surveillance may combat crime, but it will also cast its eye most heavily upon
people who use public services and spaces most frequently and may exacerbate the
criminalization of homelessness.  n4 Those with means can purchase Wi-Fi in the
home while those without may be relegated to "free" public networks where they
exchange personal information for services. Even worse, the poor often have the
least voice in public debates and decision making. Who will speak for them when
the city's big data analytics route services away from the urban core to avoid
safety issues, or systemically recommend against granting bail based on race?
n5 Other problems of inequity may emerge along the rural-urban digital  [*957]
divide.  n6 Well-funded and technically savvy city governments can afford
dedicated privacy officers, but smaller cities may rush to implement smart city
technologies while lacking the capacity or expertise to address privacy. These
issues need serious consideration now, not after smart city programs are already
in place and the damage has been done.

   It is likely that most policy makers care about privacy, at least in the
abstract. Nevertheless, the rush to capture the benefits of smart cities can
blind policy makers to important privacy considerations. This blindness is often
the result of some faulty assumptions or a mistaken framing of the privacy
issue. Whatever the reason, cities can pay the price for ignoring privacy in the
form of bad publicity. In the worst cases, the stories about smart city privacy
issues can morph out of control based on misinformation and scuttle entire
projects.  n7 At a minimum, policy makers should apply the "front page test"
when planning and implementing their smart city programs: asking themselves how
the public might react if their decision were splashed on tomorrow morning's
front page.

   City policy makers should recognize as a baseline that privacy is important
for utilitarian if not outright ethical reasons, and seek to mitigate privacy
problems wherever they can. The efforts of smart city leaders like Seattle and
Kansas City demonstrate that privacy can be a smart city feature, not a bug, but
getting to those good results requires hard work and careful planning.

A. Privacy Risk: Data Collection

1. Headline: City planners want to put big brother on every street corner, and
in every pocket

   Smart cities will collect a significant amount of data about city residents;
they need to in order to carry out their "smart" functions. In order to gather
these data, many smart cities rely on the internet of things (IoT): everyday
devices like light posts with sensors and network connectivity. Other systems
track cell phones  n8 or read license plates. Data collection by its very nature
tends to create privacy problems, particularly as the information relates to a
person. Purely from a data collection and utility standpoint, a precision sensor
on every corner, constantly storing and processing vast quantities of data, is
an ideal smart city tool. Not so much from a privacy standpoint, however.

    [*958]  The very collection of such data can be thought of as a very real,
though abstract, privacy harm.  n9 More concrete risks could materialize when
law enforcement or civil litigants want access to that data. Police departments
are already making widespread use of license plate readers on patrol cars and
roadside objects to amass large databases on motorists.  n10 Another project
called NoiseTube seeks to turn smartphones held by city residents who sign up
for the service into a distributed network of noise pollution sensors,  n11 and
one called SmartBay wants to turn cell phones into traffic monitors.  n12 To
their credit, these projects seek to protect privacy by giving users control
over whether to share their data (in the case of noise pollution), or through
anonymization (in the case of the traffic monitors). However, NoiseTube says
nothing about what happens once the user decides to share. And SmartBay does not
describe its anonymization methods, but as I will later discuss, it is quite
difficult to truly anonymize or de-identify personal information.  n13 Moreover,
there may be very little policy in place, in the form of city ordinance, state
laws, or internal privacy policies, to ensure that other projects follow privacy
safeguards in a uniform way.

   Other projects propose to collect extremely sensitive information. Smart grid
proposals, essentially a precursor to smart cities, have the potential to reveal
much more personal information about building residents thanks to the
granularity of smart meter data.  n14 The Roadside Frustration Index, a project
out of MIT still in the research phase, seeks to test a driver's level of
frustration using sensitive cameras and wearable technology.  n15 If successful,
insight into a person's emotional state while driving, or doing anything else,
could be immensely useful but highly invasive. In both cases the data collected
is extremely personal and revealing and warrants strong privacy protections.

    [*959]  2. Headline: City builds public Wi-Fi on the backs of the
disadvantaged poor

   Sensors are not the only source of data of course. Value-added services like
free Wi-Fi and public information kiosks have the potential to collect a great
deal of information about users. In fact, it is the prevailing norm in the
information economy to surveil users and sell advertising in exchange for "free"
services.  n16 Data collection via these services poses the usual privacy
problems; many users do not wish to be tracked, but lack the tools,
sophistication, or viable alternatives to preventing it.  n17 But there are also
numerous equity problems, which is ironic as these services are often meant to
extend services to poor and other underserved communities.  n18 Although the
recent repeal of FCC privacy regulations on ISPs solidifies the status quo that
all user data is subject to ISP tracking, there remains the possibility that
privacy will become a luxury good or the exclusive domain of technically savvy
users.  n19 Poor users are then left with free services at the expense of their
privacy.  n20 Further, the advertisers who run these services may be incented to
deliver minimal service to poor neighborhoods and optimal service to rich ones
because rich neighborhoods have more valuable eyeballs.  n21

3. Headline: Hackers steal personal information of millions from city data
breach

   Information security is an issue related to privacy and important in its own
right. Having vast stores of potentially sensitive information will make cities
attractive targets for cybersecurity threats. Cyber breaches are increasingly
high profile and tend to capture the public's imagination. Many experts warn
about the  [*960]  vulnerability in our connected systems,  n22 but much
progress remains to adequately secure such systems. Moreover, security problems
can arise all on their own, without nefarious hackers or thieves. Going back to
the license plate tracking example, license plate information collected by the
city of Boston was stored in plain text online for anyone to download without a
password.  n23 The data passed through the hands of multiple contractors and
subcontractors who ultimately dumped it online; Boston only discovered the issue
when informed by a journalist.  n24

   Of course, not every smart city project will create privacy problems.
Environmental sensors that measure temperature, air quality, and humidity  n25
can probably be regarded as safe from a privacy standpoint. But then again, with
the potential for mosaic effects in big data,  n26 who knows what that
information could reveal when combined with enough other data points.

B. Privacy Risk: Data Control and Use

   Strong privacy rights entail more than just preventing data collection about
persons. Just as important is how the data gets used after collection and what
degree of control the data subject can exercise.

1. Headline: Attacker figured out stalking victim's location from public city
database

   Even before the smart cities movement began, cities held on to a great deal
of information about their residents. State open records acts often required
cities to make this information available to the public, but before the digital
age much of it was obscure as a practical matter. The open data movement, a
cousin of the smart cities movement, seeks to digitize this information and make
it useful and easily accessible for the public. Open data is a win for
transparency and innovation, but it can pose privacy problems if proper controls
are not put in place.  n27 First is the potential for sensitive information to
be released because it  [*961]  was not properly de-identified.  n28 For
example, a city might release police body camera footage to comply with the
state open records act without thinking about the highly invasive nature of some
of the videos.

   Second are the twin issues of re-identification and mosaic effects. True
de-identification is quite difficult to accomplish because the prevalence of big
data often allows determined actors to reverse the de-identification process and
compromise a data subject's privacy.  n29 In a classic example, researchers were
able to re-identify medical records from knowing only the sex, date of birth,
and zip code of the patient.  n30 The mosaic effect becomes a concern when
multiple data sets are available for combination (the very core of big data).
n31 The combination of data sets can reveal information that was thought to be
anonymous, for instance linking various records through a common zip code,  n32
and in some cases can lead to complete re-identification. Moreover even
aggregate or meta data can be misused.  n33

2. Headline: City breaks promise not to reveal resident's personal information

   Data collection problems turn into data control problems when city's data
changes hands. Going back to the Boston license plate example, that data became
exposed after it passed through the hands of multiple vendors, the last of which
failed to take common-sense precautions with sensitive information. Even if a
smart city makes strong privacy commitments, those commitments are meaningless
if they aren't enforceable on downstream parties. For instance an analysis of
the city of Seattle's vendor contracts revealed that only a small minority made
any mention of protecting the privacy and cybersecurity of the data sets.  n34

   In addition, city residents and smart city users may consent to their data
being used in one way by a certain set of actors, but not in other ways by other
entities. For example, a homeowner might wish to share meter data to improve
energy efficiency, but would not want that data shared to target advertising. Or
they might consent to advertising, but not to having their appliances shut off
during peak usage times. What's more, because of bounded rationality and the
limitations of privacy policies, users may not even be aware of the myriad ways
[*962]  their information is being used and reused, bought and sold.  n35 Again,
economically disadvantaged communities may be at a greater risk because they may
lack the sophistication and technical fluency to navigate the services in the
first place, let along complex privacy policies.  n36

3. Headline: City prefers manipulation over legislation to control citizen
behavior

   City policy makers have numerous tools at their disposal to influence citizen
behavior. Cities routinely legislate through city codes and ordinances. Scholars
have also been exploring alternative means of regulation such as nudging
(designing around cognitive biases to push people toward salutary behavior).
n37 This regulatory approach grew in standing when Cass Sunstein ascended to the
head of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs under Obama. Other
works show that digitizing platforms can lead to problematic asymmetries of
information and power, leaving consumers subject to unprecedented manipulation.
n38 Taken together, these two bodies of literature suggest that digital (i.e.
smart) cities will present numerous and novel opportunities for policy makers to
influence citizens.

   As smart cities move to digitize their interactions with citizens, the
interface between city and citizen will be increasingly subject to the design
caprice of policy makers. But cities should be wary of abusing these techniques.
Even the originators of nudging warn that such techniques should be constrained
by the front page test.  n39 If warnings to heed the front page test are not
enough,  [*963]  judicial concerns over separation of powers may haunt or even
end well-intentioned regulation.

   For example, in a decidedly analogue case, The New York City Department of
Health recently attempted to nudge people toward drinking smaller portions of
sugary drinks by capping soda serving sizes. One of the reasons the New York
Appellate Division struck down the regulation because it violated separation of
powers.  n40 They reasoned that the board usurped legislative role of
identifying new health hazards.  n41 By relying on digital design and
architecture, policy makers will have even greater opportunities to circumvent
democratic processes. They may also inadvertently violate other legal
constraints like due process or equal protection. The digitization of cities, no
less than market places or service platforms, will bring disruptive change that
may challenge existing legal structures and theories.

C. Privacy Risk: Inequity and Discrimination

   Smart city programs have the potential to ease inequity and discrimination
and deliver better services for all city residents, but as with privacy,
unthinking or careless adoption can threaten civil rights and increase or
entrench inequity.

1. Headline: City Wi-Fi program discriminates against the poor and elderly

   For example, many smart city initiatives rely on smartphones as a predeployed
network of sensors and trackers. However it is easy to forget that not everyone
has ready access to this technology. While smartphone penetration in the U.S.
has reached an impressive 79.3% of the mobile phone market,  n42 that still
leaves 20% of the population without this so-called "ubiquitous" technology. And
that is not even counting people without cellphones. If a service for requesting
road improvements  n43 or to provide "first mile, last mile" transit services
(getting people from their front doors to public transit, and vice-versa) relies
solely on smartphones, then one in every five people will be left out. Other
projects may simply fail to deliver the intended benefits to certain communities
[*964]  because of a lack of understanding of those community's needs.  n44 Or
as mentioned earlier, the design of some projects might create disparate impacts
between communities, such as ad-supported projects catering more to rich users
with more valuable eyeballs.  n45 Much of the foregoing discussion has focused
on the ways in which a lack of privacy can have a disparate impact on the poor.

   Large databases can discriminate in prosaic and unintended ways, for instance
through simple data entry errors. People who change their names (often women)
and those with multiple surnames (often people of color like Hispanics) are more
likely to have errors in identity databases.  n46 However, big data also poses
risks of more pernicious forms of discrimination. There are significant worries
this technology could be used to digitally redline certain ethnic or otherwise
unwanted groups from retail commerce, employment, tenancy, or credit.  n47 Much
of the data collected and process by a smart city program is not subject to the
protections of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, yet some companies have found a
way to use it as a proxy for credit risk all the same.  n48 Recall that mosaic
effects allow multiple data points in city open data initiatives to link
information to zip code. This fact could revive the specter of good-old fashion
redlining, where information available through city open data portals
inadvertently links people to zip codes who are then disadvantaged in home
lending.

2. Headline: Predictive policing algorithm targets Blacks and Latinos

   Increased reliance on algorithms to make decisions about people's lives also
presents discrimination concerns. While many smart city initiatives focus on
improving city systems like transportation or delivering municipal Wi-Fi,
algorithmic decision-making is a more cutting-edge application. Early adopters
hope it can improve municipal governance and efficiency. For example, Washington
D.C. has begun basing bail decisions for city jails based not on ability to pay,
but on a computer algorithm's assessment of the accused's flight and recidivism
risk.  n49 At first blush, removing ability to pay as a factor seems a  [*965]
more equitable solution. However, civil rights activists have expressed concerns
that the data feeding these algorithms may reflect and perpetuate system bias
already prominent in the criminal justice system.  n50 If such systems are built
without giving thought to the potential for discrimination, they will preserve
it under the guise of scientific fairness. Algorithms, like all technologies,
are designed by people, and design choices will always reflect the biases or
lack of knowledge of the designer.  n51

IV. COMMON ASSUMPTIONS AND MISTAKES

   What are the assumptions and mistakes that underpin these smart city risks?
Part IV will identify a few of the most pernicious ones and recommend simple
reframes to mitigate them. Sometimes the remedy is merely to recognize the
potential risks. In other cases, it will question longstanding practices in the
commercial internet.

   A. Assumption: Google does it, so we can too.

   In the prevailing price model for services in the information economy, users
divulge some private information and/or assent to tracking in exchange for
"free" services. But in that model, when the service is free, the user is the
product. As people become more accustomed to giving up privacy for free
services, the temptation to borrow the private sector model only grows. After
all, governments always need more money, and the monetary value of incoming data
from smart cities is hard to ignore. Why shouldn't cities sell this data to
raise revenue or at least offset the cost of delivering smart city services?

   The answer lies in the different responsibilities of private and public
sector actors. Private companies have a responsibility to deliver value to their
shareholders. They care about privacy only insofar as it is good for the bottom
line. What's more, every individual customer strikes their own bargain with a
company when they use the company's services. They may not negotiate the
individual terms of the contract, but they can at least choose whether to
transact.

   The social contract is different from a commercial contract. Governments have
an inherent responsibility to safeguard the interest of their citizens, and
among those interests is privacy. Most individuals cannot feasibly opt out of
public life, nor should they be forced to in order to protect their privacy.
Further, every citizen already pays for services in the form of taxes. There are
already defined pathways through which governments raise money; to step outside
those pathways can violate the implicit bargain between people and their
governments.

    [*966]  B. Assumption: Notice and consent is always enough to protect
privacy

   Notice and consent, the idea that institutions must properly notify users and
obtain their consent before collecting and using their data, has been the
cornerstone of privacy regulation in the US for years, though many privacy
scholars have looked at this regime and found it lacking.  n52 Such notices may
be incomprehensible to the average user,  n53 or simply too numerous to deal
with as a practical matter.  n54 Notice and consent faces further difficulty in
IoT applications such as public cameras or light poles because 1) meaningful
opportunities to provide notice and consent are few or non-existent and 2)
citizens do not have a meaningful choice to avoid city streets. There are other,
more privacy protecting regimes that cities can and should employ.  n55

C. Assumption: This will be better because it involves technology

   Some policy makers may pursue technological solutions uncritically out of
blind faith that because they involve technology, they must be better. Smart
cities do, after all, have the word "smart" in their name. But policy makers
would do well to remember that new technological breakthroughs often come with
new risks, or present risks in new ways. Cathy O'Neil, author of the book
Weapons of Math Destruction, has documented the myriad ways in which the
unthinking application of algorithms and big data analytics can have negative
consequences.  n56 Technology is still built by human beings, and will often
reflect the human goals, ideologies, and biases.  n57

    [*967]  D. Assumption: Free services have zero cost

   The information economy offers an ever expanding number of services without
asking for a penny in exchange. Instead, users give their consent, sometimes
explicit, though often tacit, to divulge personal information up front and have
their online activities tracked. This arrangement has created tremendous value
for both users and service providers. But is it truly without cost? Chris
Hoofnagle and Jan Whittington have documented how the "free" label allows
companies to "generate contractual hazards for consumers, ignore consumer
preferences for privacy, and mislead consumers by creating the impression that a
given transaction will be free."  n58 Policy makers should not be similarly
misled.

   Privacy is not free, and if smart cities are to protect it they will likely
need to bear those costs. For example, in 2006 the San Francisco mayor's office
greenlit a municipal Wi-Fi project in partnership with Earthlink and Google.
n59 The deal would have subjected users, particularly free users, to invasive
tracking.  n60 However a study by the city budget analyst showed that although a
municipally owned service posed some risks, it was fiscally feasible and more
privacy protective.  n61 Cities should consider the true costs of "free"
services, and consider whether other models can suit their purposes while
protecting privacy.

E. Assumption: De-identification/aggregation eliminates privacy risks

   I have already covered the difficulties of creating truly de-identified and
anonymous data sets above, and others have done the same task much more
skillfully than I ever could.  n62 In privacy, as in life, there are no silver
bullets or one-size-fits-all solutions. De-identification has a role to play,
but it cannot be the only privacy protection in place.

F. Assumption: More data is always better

   The benefits of big data are so tempting that it can be easy to fall into
this trap. However, increasing the amount of data held also increases the risks
discussed above. Recall that state open records acts may require disclosure of
[*968]  vast swathes of city-held records, which will only grow in volume as
smart cities hold on to more data. For example, Washington state's law requires
disclosure of all records except for six specifically enumerated categories,
greatly increasing the risk of unintended information spillage as cities like
Seattle collect more data.  n63

   Data minimization is a powerful tool to avoid these risks. In another
example, Kansas City's Sensity light posts process all of their visual data
locally in the lighting unit via machine learning algorithm that can determine
whether to take action without a human ever laying eyes on the video feed.
Therefore, this data does not need to be transmitted or stored at a central
location, nor does it even need to be recorded.

G. Mistake: Forgetting about security

   Hopefully, with the rise in high profile attacks and data breaches this
mistake is becoming less common. But even when organizations attempt to address
security, it is notoriously difficult to do well. Cities also need to ensure
that their vendors and other third parties treat their data with an appropriate
level of care.

H. Mistake: Proceeding without transparency or public engagement

   As this essay's headlines illustrate, privacy, or lack thereof, can make the
public nervous, and stories about privacy abuses can go viral quickly. This
seems to be a lesson that governments will be learning for as long as
governments exist, but transparency and public engagement are the best way to
avoid a bad headline. They also make for better governance, and hopefully better
privacy protections. Kansas City's smart city advisory board is a model of
transparency in this respect and may be credited with the quiet and quiescent
implementation of their smart city plan.

V. MODELS

   The potential benefits of smart cities are too great to let a privacy
fundamentalist approach prevent their implementation. Instead, policy makers
should be pragmatic, and clear-eyed about the privacy and discrimination risks.
Many policy makers are already thinking about these risks.  n64 Fortunately,
there is a great deal of precedent for protecting the privacy of institutionally
and government held data while delivering benefits to consumers and citizens.

    [*969]  A. Seattle's Privacy Vetting Process

   While Seattle has had its share of run-ins with privacy advocates in the
past,  n65 recent efforts demonstrate a strong commitment both to
transparency/open data and privacy. While the city has made commitments to open
up its data across all departments,  n66 it has also implemented an extensive
privacy intake and review process to handle this data.  n67 The program is
pragmatic; it recognizes that different departments have varying levels of
sophistication when it comes to privacy, and therefore utilizes an easily
understood privacy review process.  n68 The program consists of a series of
straightforward questions, many of them Yes/No and all of them in plain English,
to walk civil servants through the process of deciding how to handle city data.
n69

   The city created a chief privacy officer that can work across departments to
ensure citywide compliance with the privacy program, rather than being confined
to the Department of Information Technology.  n70 It also designates "Privacy
Champions" within individual departments to help inculcate a culture of privacy
within the bureaucracy and implement programs.  n71

   Finally, the city conducted an extensive privacy impact assessment with local
partners at the University of Washington to identify weaknesses in its programs.
One finding of the assessment was that vendor contracts were often weak or
agnostic on privacy protection.  n72 After the assessment, the city found that
one of its vendor contracts enabled a vendor to sell the traffic location data
from Bluetooth and Wi-Fi sensors on secondary markets. With this realization,
the city was able to successfully renegotiate its contract, and is working on
standard terms that will protect privacy. Cities should remember that have
tremendous market power in negotiating contracts.  n73

    [*970]  B. San Francisco's Open Data Release Toolkit

   DataSF, San Francisco's Open Data Initiative, employs a comprehensive,
step-by-step model to balance privacy risks vs. data utility when deciding
whether to disclose city data. While perhaps overly complex for city employees
unfamiliar with the nuances of data privacy, the model is keenly aware of the
privacy risks discussed in this essay, particularly re-identification. It
astutely calls for regular penetration testing and re-assessment of privacy
impacts.  n74

C. HIPAA

   The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act starts with the
assumption of confidentiality and privacy and only deviates from that norm under
specific enumerated circumstances.  n75 In addition to strict, though imperfect,
n76 requirements for de-identification,  n77 HIPAA's privacy rules have strong
proscriptions against using patient data for marketing.  n78 The law is not
without its faults of course, but emphasizes patient control of data and has
become synonymous with strong privacy protection, while allowing for salutary
uses of data for things like research.  n79

D. The U.S. Census

   What does a 226-year-old accounting of American households run by a federal
bureaucracy have to do with privacy? It turns out quite a lot when it involves
collecting personal information on every single American (or at least trying
to). The Census Bureau collects vast amounts of personal information on
Americans while maintaining strong privacy protections related to disclosure,
n80 misuse,  n81 and access for research.  n82 At the same time, the Bureau
allows the data subject access to and use of their own data.  n83

    [*971]  E. The Privacy Act

   The Privacy Act of 1974 was one of the earliest codifications of the Fair
Information Practices (FIPs). It protects personal information held by the
federal government from disclosure.  n84 The interplay between the Privacy Act
and the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)  n85 can be a model for cities
struggling to balance privacy and transparency.

F. State Privacy Acts

   State privacy acts are too numerous to detail here, but the laboratory of
democracy offers a myriad of ways to protect citizen privacy in publicly held
data.

CONCLUSION

   Nothing in this essay should be taken as a comprehensive list of the privacy
problems and solutions facing smart cities. For instance, the Fair Information
Practices or FIPs have been a leading example of strong privacy protections
(when organizations actually follow them), and the Federal Trade Commission has
been regulating privacy for decades. The US has other well developed, sector
specific privacy regimes such as the Fair Credit Reporting Act and the
Graham-Leach-Bliley Act. There are also many examples to draw from
internationally, lest we assume the smart cities movement is confined to the US.

   Indeed, these issues are too vast to resolve with a single effort; they will
require collaboration and conversation from numerous stakeholders. But the work
begins by acknowledging the problems and committing to address them early on.
Protecting privacy is well within the power of policy makers who are aware of
the problems and committed to fixing them. In doing so, they have an opportunity
to challenge some of the underlying assumptions and longstanding practices that
pose risks in the first place, hopefully improving privacy as a whole. At the
very least, they may prevent valuable, innovative smart city projects from
falling victim to public ire and a nasty headline.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
GovernmentsCourtsCourt RecordsGovernmentsLocal
GovernmentsFinanceGovernmentsPublic ImprovementsGeneral Overview

FOOTNOTES:





n1  Fact Sheet: Announcing Over $ 80 Million in New Federal Investment and a
Doubling of Participating Communities in the White House Smart Cities Initiative
, THE WHITE HOUSE (Sept. 26, 2016),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/09/26/fact-sheet-announcing-ove
r-80-million-new-federal-investment-and.





n2  Sam Musa, Smart City Roadmap, ACADEMIA (Jan. 2016),
http://www.academia.edu/21181336/Smart_City_Roadmap.





n3  See Chris Jay Hoofnagle & Jan Whittington, Free: Accounting for the Cost of
the Internet's Most Popular Price, 61 UCLA L. REV. 606, 628-634 (2014).





n4  See generally No Safe Place: The Criminalization of Homelessness in U.S.
Cities, NAT'L L. CENTER ON HOMELESSNESS &POVERTY (2016),
https://www.nlchp.org/documents/No_Safe_Place.





n5  See Julia Angwin et al., Machine Bias, PROPUBLICA (May 23, 2016),
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sen
tencing. But see Sam Corbett-Davies et al., A Computer Program Used for Bail and
Sentencing Decisions was Labeled Biased Against Blacks. It's Actually Not That
Clear, WASH. POST (Oct. 17, 2016),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/10/17/can-an-algorithm-b
e-racist-our-analysis-is-more-cautious-than-propublicas/?utm_term=.71f83f7240d7.





n6  Mapping the Digital Divide, THE WHITE HOUSE (July 2015),
https://www.scribd.com/document/271665456/Mapping-the-Digital-Divide#.





n7  Brendan Kiley & Matt Fikse-Verkerk, You Are a Rogue Device, THE STRANGER
(Nov. 6, 2013),
http://www.thestranger.com/seattle/you-are-a-rogue-device/Content?oid=18143845.
Cf. Seattle Police Department Deploys Aruba Networks to Provide Video
Surveillance For Annual Mardi Gras Festival, ARUBA NETWORKS (2012),
http://www.arubanetworks.com/pdf/solutions/CS_Seattle-Police.pdf.





n8  Cell phones can be tracked using GPS, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth mesh networks, or by
other means.





n9  See Daniel J. Solove, A Taxonomy of Privacy, 154 U. PA. L. REV. 477, 491
(2006).





n10  See You Are Being Tracked, AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 1, 2-4 (July
2013), https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/071613-aclu-alprreport-opt-v05.pdf.





n11  About, NOISETUBE, http://noisetube.net/#&panel1-1 (last visited Nov. 11,
2016).





n12  SmartBay, SMART CITIES RESEARCH CENTER,
http://smartcities.berkeley.edu/smartbay/ (last visited Nov. 11, 2016).





n13  See generally Latanya Sweeney, Matching Known Patients to Health Records in
Washington State Data, DATA PRIVACY LAB (2013),
http://dataprivacylab.org/projects/wa/1089-1.pdf.





n14  See Deirdre K. Mulligan et al., Privacy in the Smart Grid: An Information
Flow Analysis, U.C. BERKELEY SCH. OF INFO. 1, 10-11 (Mar. 2011),
https://poseidon01.ssrn.com/delivery.php?ID=179007082000079120071120083099002011
00803500102905202701802402412600611809806511107003111911505505101610508612012609
91260880690440360910400411050670111141270260250670070731251240940020640770250010
66086117085097021076006064087077005099027122024029017&EXT=pdf.





n15  Road Frustration Index, SENSIBLE MASS. INST. TECH.,
http://senseable.mit.edu/rfi/ (last visited Nov. 11, 2016).





n16  Hoofnagle & Whittington, supra note 3, at 608, 624-628.





n17  See Joseph Turow et al., Americans Reject Tailored Advertising: And Three
Activities that Enable It, N.Y. TIMES 1, 3 (2009),
http://www.nytimes.com/packages/pdf/business/20090929-Tailored_Advertising.pdf;
Edward C. Baig, Internet Users Say, Don't Track Me, USA TODAY (Dec. 14, 2010),
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/advertising/2010-12-14-donottrackpoll14_ST_
N.htm.





n18  See Doug Smith, Poor Residents Were Promised Wi-Fi Service. The Times Found
They Didn't Get It, L.A. TIMES (Apr. 1, 2016),
http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-missing-wifi-20160403-story.html;
Greg B. Smith, De Blasio's Wi-Fi Plan Gives Slower Service to Poorer
Neighborhoods, N.Y. DAILY NEWS (Nov. 24, 2014),
http://www.nydailynews.com/newyork/exclusive-de-blasio-Wi-Fi-plan-slower-poor-na
bes-article-1.2021146.





n19  See Brian Krebs, Post-FCC Privacy Rules, Should You VPN?, KREBS ON SECURITY
(Mar. 17, 2017),
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2017/03/post-fcc-privacy-rules-should-you-vpn/.





n20  See generally Karen Matthews, Wi-Fi? Why not? Homeless are Avid Users of
Free Web Kiosks, PHYS.ORG (Aug. 23, 2016),
http://phys.org/news/2016-08-wi-fi-homeless-avid-users-nyc.html.





n21  Lauren Evans, Free Wi-Fi Will Be Weaker In Poor Neighborhoods, THE
GOTHAMIST (Nov. 24, 2014), http://gothamist.com/2014/11/24/wifi_1.php.





n22  Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity: New York Meeting Minutes,
NAT'L INST. OF STANDARDS & TECH. 1, 6 (May 16, 2016),
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/may_16_2016_nyc_meeting_minutes.pdf.





n23  Kade Crockford, Boston's License Plate Reader Database Was Online in Plain
Text With No Password Protection, ACLU (Sep. 10, 2015),
https://www.aclu.org/blog/speak-freely/bostons-license-plate-reader-database-was
-online-plain-text-no-password-protection.





n24  Id.





n25  See Array of Things, ARRAY OF THINGS, https://arrayofthings.github.io/
(last visited Nov. 11, 2016).





n26  OFFICE OF MGMT. &BUDGET, EXEC. OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, OMB MEMORANDUM
13-13, OPEN DATA POLICY--MANAGING INFORMATION AS AN ASSET (May 13, 2013).





n27  See Barbara J. Parker & Kiran Jain, The Challenges of Open Data and Privacy
Issues, WESTERN CITY (Apr. 2015),
http://www.westerncity.com/Western-City/April-2015/The-Challenges-of-Open-Data-a
nd-Privacy-Issues/.





n28  See Jan Whittington et al., Push, Pull, and Spill: A Transdisciplinary Case
Study in Municipal Open Government, 30 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 1899, 1941-42 (2016).





n29  See generally Sweeney, supra note 13.





n30  Id. at 2.





n31  Whittington et al., supra note 28, at 1915.





n32  Id. at 1941-42.





n33  A Monograph on Confidentiality and Privacy in the U.S. Census, U.S. CENSUS
BUREAU 1, 47 (July 2001),
https://www.census.gov/history/pdf/ConfidentialityMonograph.pdf.





n34  Whittington et al., supra note 28, at 1947.





n35  See generally Matthew W. Vail et al., An Empirical Study of Consumer
Perceptions and Comprehension of Web Site Privacy Policies, 55 IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON ENGINEERING MGMT. 1, 442 (2008),
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=4534828.





n36  Heather E. Hudson, Municipal Wireless Broadband: Lessons from San Francisco
and Silicon Valley, 27 TELEMATICS & INFORMATICS 1, 5 (2009).





n37  See Ryan Calo, Code, Nudge, or Notice?, 99 IOWA L. REV. 773 (2014)
(examining similarities and differences between extra-legislative regulation in
the forms of code (architecture) nudge (libertarian paternalism) and notice and
arguing that regulators should favor facilitation over friction when applying
these techniques). See also Monika Glowacki, Nudging Cities: Innovating with
Behavioral Science, DATA-SMART CITY SOLUTIONS (May 17, 2016),
http://datasmart.ash.harvard.edu/news/article/nudging-cities-innovating-with-beh
avioral-science-833.





n38  See Ryan Calo, Digital Market Manipulation, 82 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 995
(2014) (identifying problematic asymmetries of information and power in digital
marketplaces). An important distinction, however, is the private nature of
digital marketplaces like Amazon versus the public nature of cities. Public
actors are often constrained by stronger legal rules (like the Constitution and
public records acts) and democratic processes. Private actors are typically
constrained by weaker legal rules (in the laisez faire United States anyway) and
market forces (which may be more prone to failure with digital technology). See
id.





n39  RICHARD H. THALER & CASS R. SUNSTEIN, NUDGE: IMPROVING DECISIONS ABOUT
HEALTH, WEALTH, AND HAPPINESS, 244-5 (2008).





n40  See N.Y. Statewide Coalition of Hispanic Chambers of Commerce v. N.Y.C.
Dep't of Health & Mental Hygiene, 970 N.Y.S.2d 200 (N.Y. App. Div. 2013) leave
to appeal granted, 976 N.Y.S.2d 447 (N.Y. 2013).





n41  970 N.Y.S.2d at 200.





n42  comScore Reports December 2015 U.S. Smartphone Subscriber Market Share,
COMSCORE, (Feb. 4, 2016),
http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Market-Rankings/comScore-Reports-December-2015-
US-Smartphone-Subscriber-Market-Share?.





n43  Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, Preserving Values, EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE
PRESIDENT 1, 52 (May 2014),
https://www.eff.org/files/2014/05/01/big_data_privacy_report_may_1_2014.pdf.





n44  Hudson, supra note 36.





n45  See Evans, supra note 21.





n46  Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, supra note 43.





n47  Id. See also Julia Angwin & Terry Parris, Jr., Facebook Lets Advertisers
Exclude Users by Race, PROPUBLICA (Oct. 28, 2016),
https://www.propublica.org/article/facebook-lets-advertisers-exclude-users-by-ra
ce; Robinson Meyer, Could a Bank Deny Your Loan Based on Your Facebook Friends?,
THE ATLANTIC (Sept. 25, 2015),
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/09/facebooks-new-patent-and-
digitalred-lining/407287/.





n48  Steve Henn, If There's Privacy in the Digital Age, It Has a New Definition,
NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO (Mar. 3, 2014),
http://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2014/03/03/285334820/if-theres-pri
vacy-in-the-digital-age-it-has-a-new-definition.





n49  Sabri Ben-Achour, Washington DC has Figured Out a Way Around Money Bail,
NORTH CAROLINA PUBLIC RADIO -- WUNC,
http://wunc.org/post/washington-dc-has-figured-out-way-around-money-bail#stream/
0 (last visited Feb. 21, 2017).





n50  See Angwin et al., supra note 5; Corbett-Davies et al., supra note 5.





n51  Cathy O'Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction, DISCOVER MAG. (Sept. 1, 2016),
http://discovermagazine.com/2016/oct/weapons-of-math-destruction.





n52  See generally Solon Barocas & Helen Nissenbaum, On Notice: The Trouble with
Notice and Consent, PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGAGING DATA FORUM (2009),
https://www.nyu.edu/projects/nissenbaum/papers/ED_SII_On_Notice.pdf; Joel R.
Reidenberg et al., Privacy Harms and the Effectiveness of the Notice and Choice
Framework, TPRC CONFERENCE PAPER (2014),
http://moritzlaw.osu.edu/students/groups/is/files/2015/01/Privacy-Harms-and-Noti
ce-and-Choice-01-12-2015-1-4.pdf.





n53  See Vail et al., supra note 35, at 442.





n54  Alexis C. Madrigal, Reading the Privacy Policies You Encounter in a Year
Would Take 76 Work Days, THE ATLANTIC (Mar. 1, 2012),
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/03/reading-the-privacy-polici
es-you-encounter-in-a-year-would-take-76-work-days/253851/.





n55  See generally Robert H. Sloan & Richard Warner, Beyond Notice and Choice:
Privacy, Norms, and Consent, 14 J. OF HIGH TECH. L. 370 (2014),
https://www.suffolk.edu/documents/jhtl_publications/SloanWarner.pdf; Bojana
Bellamy & Markus Heyder, Empowering Individuals Beyond Consent, INT'L ASS'N
PRIVACY PERSPECTIVES (2015),
https://iapp.org/news/a/empowering-individuals-beyond-consent/; Daniel J.
Solove, Privacy Self-Management and the Consent Dilemma, 126 HARV. L. REV. 1879
(2013).





n56  O'Neil, supra note 51, at 21.





n57  Id.





n58  Hoofnagle & Whittington, supra note 3, at 606.





n59  Whatever Happened to Municipal Wi-Fi?, THE ECONOMIST (July 26, 2013),
http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2013/07/wireless-networks.





n60  A Privacy Analysis of the Six Proposals for San Francisco Municipal
Broadband, ELECTRONIC PRIVACY INFO. CENTER,
https://epic.org/privacy/internet/sfan4306.html (last visited Nov. 11, 2016).





n61  Fiscal Feasibility Analysis of a Municipally-Owned Citywide Broadband
Network, BOARD OF SUPERVISORS--S.F. BUDGET ANALYST 1, 2 (Jan. 11, 2007),
https://web.archive.org/web/20091010024414/http://www.sfgov.org/site/uploadedfil
es/budanalyst/Reports/WiFi/MunicipalWiFiReport_011107.pdf.





n62  See generally Sweeney, supra note 13.





n63  Whittington et al., supra note 28, at 1920.





n64  See, e.g., Parker & Jain, supra note 27.





n65  See Kiley & Fikse-Verkerk, supra note 7.





n66  See generally Open Data Policy, CITY OF SEATTLE (Feb. 1, 2016),
http://www.seattle.gov/Documents/Departments/SeattleGovPortals/CityServices/Open
DataPolicyV1.pdf.





n67  See City of Seattle Privacy Program, CITY OF SEATTLE 1, 23-27 (Oct. 2015),
http://ctab.seattle.gov/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/COS-Privacy-Program.pdf.





n68  Id.





n69  Id.





n70  See id. at 9.





n71  See id.





n72  Whittington et al., supra note 28, at 1947.





n73  After the privacy study conducted by Whittington et al., including this
author, the city of Seattle began developing model contract clauses to better
regulate data sharing with vendors and immediately renegotiated at least one
contract.





n74  DataSF: Resources -- Open Data Release Toolkit, CITY & COUNTY OF S.F. 1,
17, https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B0jc1tmJAlTcR0RMV01PM2NyNDA/view (last
visited Feb. 28, 2017).





n75  45 C.F.R. § 164.502(a) (2013).





n76  See generally Sweeney, supra note 13.





n77  45 C.F.R. § 164.514(b) (2013). See also 'Best Practice' Guidelines for
Managing the Disclosure of De-Identified Health Information, HEALTH SYSTEM USE
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE DATA DE-IDENTIFICATION WORKING GROUP 1 (Oct. 2011),
http://www.webcitation.org/5x9w6635d.





n78  45 C.F.R. § 164.508(a)(3) (2013).





n79  45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i) (2016).





n80  13 U.S.C. § 214 (2016).





n81  13 U.S.C. § 8(c) (2016); 13 U.S.C. § 9 (2016); while the Census Bureau's
privacy protections are admirable, past abuses also offer a cautionary tale.
Specifically, the federal government used aggregated census data to aid in the
internment of Japanese Americans during World War II. A Monograph on
Confidentiality and Privacy in the U.S. Census, U.S.CENSUS BUREAU 1, 14-16 (July
2001), https://www.census.gov/history/pdf/ConfidentialityMonograph.pdf.





n82  13 U.S.C. chapter 10; Confidentiality Monograph; 15 C.F.R. Part 50.





n83  13 U.S.C. § 8(a) (2016).





n84  5 U.S.C. § 552 a(b) (2016).





n85  5 U.S.C. § 552 (2016).


                               15 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                           FICCI Studies and Surveys

                                August 31, 2017

Theme Paper of Digital Rajasthan Conclave: Transforming Lives through
Technology: Analytics

LENGTH: 860  words


Analytics as a business discipline has existed for decades. Its application and
acceptance have increased recently because of the pace and scale of data
generation, the increase in processing speeds, rapidly reducing storage costs,
and the sophistication of enabling tools and technology. These advances have led
to the promise of better business decisions informed by the science of
analytics. Analytics now sits at the top of the business agenda for many leading
organizations looking for new ways to create competitive advantage. Government
agencies have significant volumes of data, and more often than not there is
little/no dialogue between departments. The insights that can be derived out of
tapping into the collective knowledge of various departments is left to one's
imagination. It would generate outcomes more than sum of its parts.



Governments can harness the power of analytics in a way that very few
organizations can, for example, to reduce/eliminate financial leakages from
social welfare schemes, to detect the most crime-prone areas in a city, to plug
revenue leakage by identifying fraudulent transactions in taxation and
expenditure, to improve emergency services, and to improve disaster response
using predictive analytics. These are just a few ways that Governments can
utilize the potential of analytics and big data to help serve people better.

Current scenario

Analytics for governments implies handling, processing and sharing massive
amounts of data. That data may be structured data, such as the data managed
within a database system, or it might be unstructured data, requiring additional
technologies for interpretation and conversion into a usable format. It also
requires having the right skill sets with different kinds of analytics
solutions, such as descriptive analytics (analyzing what happened), predictive
analytics (in which historical data is scanned to find behavior patterns that
can be used to predict upcoming events or decisions) and prescriptive analytics
(which uses the discovered patterns to decide the course of action). The
government and public sector are harnessing the benefits of analytics using
customer and behavior segmentation, churn and user engagement analytics,
enhanced financial controlling and reporting, tax risk and opportunity
assessment, predictive planning and forecasting for budget and fraud analytics.

Marquee case studies

Government agencies around the world have already started adopting and
implementing analytics:

1. Formally instituted by Michael Bloomberg, Mayor of NYC, at the beginning of
2013, the Mayor's Office of Data Analytics (MODA) represents a paradigm shift in
how governments work-one that is guided primarily by data and the expertise of
the people behind it. Its key implementations include the response to 911 and
the Fire Department New York (FDNY).

2. Using big data and analytics to reduce crimes on the streets is also getting
traction these days. Predictive policing is one such endeavor. Los Angeles
Police Department (LAPD) has achieved significant success by deploying PredPol.
Crimes in the Los Angeles foothill division came down by 13% in the 4 months
following the rollout of PredPol compared to an increase of 0.4% in the rest of
the city where the rollout had not happened.

3. Washington State Department of Labor and Industries: This department
initiated an effort to identify all gaps in its detection and its management of
possible workers compensation fraud. The group automated the fraud analysis
process and improved business analytics to move the organization from detecting
fraud after the fact (and working toward recouping payments), to being a more
proactive organization that can quickly detect fraud, stop it and prevent it
from happening in the future.

4. US Metropolitan Finance Agency: The agency conducted a 14-week pilot project
to define a standard for identifying and quantifying non-compliance, and
employed analytics to identify likely violators. An initial assessment of 100
properties (of 26,000) from the prioritized candidate list yielded an additional
21% noncompliance identification. As a result of identifying non-compliance, the
agency stands to collect an estimated $26 to $50 million in additional revenue.

Key opportunities for the government and way forward

An easy-to-use analytics solutions has the potential for creating value, but
there are times when the desire to adopt solutions such as analytics are
hindered by government management turnover, the long time frames of the
budgeting process, reliance on legacy platforms, and the overall complexity of
the government's technology environment. To overcome challenges of introducing
analytics, governments need to look for solutions that enable incremental
adoption methods and technologies. At the same time, they should make sure that
the transition allows them to overcome the change management issues. They should
choose tools with a low barrier to entry that are easy to use and integrate, can
parse both structured and unstructured data, and fit well into the existing
technology architecture, thus making analytics a part of the government
enterprise environment.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newsletter


                Copyright 2017 FICCI, distributed by Contify.com
                              All Rights Reserved


                               16 of 27 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright (c) 2017 Minnesota Law Review Foundation
                              Minnesota Law Review

                                   June, 2017

                              Minnesota Law Review

                             101 Minn. L. Rev. 2397

LENGTH: 35775 words

ARTICLE: The Consequences of Disparate Policing:Evaluating Stop and Frisk as a
Modality of Urban Policing

NAME: Aziz Z. Huq*

BIO: * Frank and Bernice J. Greenberg Professor of Law, University of Chicago
Law School. Disclosure: I am on the board of the ACLU of Illinois, and have been
closely and actively involved in their work on stop and frisk in the city of
Chicago. This Article, however, reflects solely my own views and is only based
on publicly available information. It does not reflect the position of the ACLU
or any other organization. My thanks to Jeff Fagan, John Rappaport, and David
Sklansky for helpful comments and informative conversations. Thanks also to
Christina Squiers, Haynes Hansen, Roxanne Thorelli, and other editors at the
Minnesota Law Review for their excellent editing and professionalism. Support
for this research was provided by the Frank Cicero, Jr. Faculty Fund. All errors
are the author's responsibility alone. Copyright © 2017 by Aziz Z. Huq.

TEXT:
 [*2398]

   INTRODUCTION

 Beginning in the 1990s, police departments in major American cities started
aggressively deploying pedestrian stops and body searches in response to
escalating violent crime rates. n1 The programmatic deployment of "stop and
frisk" or "stop, question, and frisk" (SQF) in New York, n2 Chicago, n3
Philadelphia, n4 and other major cities n5 involved large numbers of street
stops and frisks, often concentrated in a handful of minority neighborhoods.
Given the volume of individuals stopped, SQF likely became the modal form of
police-citizen contact for many urban residents. n6 Between May and August 2014,
for example, police in Chicago stopped more than 250,000 people - which
translates into 93.6 stops per 1000 inhabitants. n7 In Philadelphia, police have
stopped between 215,000 and 253,000 people per year since 2009. n8 In Baltimore,
the Department of Justice estimates,  [*2399]  roughly 412,000 people were
stopped in 2014. n9 At its peak in 2011, New York's SQF policy generated more
than 685,700 stops per year. n10 Between 2004 and 2013, that city's inhabitants
experienced roughly five million street stops. n11

   Given the sheer scale of these intrusions into citizens' daily lives, it is
hardly surprising that SQF would provoke some public controversy. Sharp-elbowed
debate has ensued as to whether African Americans and Hispanics are being
inappropriately stopped and searched. n12 In addition to catalyzing a wider
national argument about race and policing, n13 SQF has sparked large-scale
public protests, n14 mayoral campaigns, n15 threats to sue, n16 and litigation
itself. In the wake of legal challenges, settlements or consent decrees
regulating the use of street stops have been reached in the past few years in
several cities. In the last year or so, New York, n17 Chicago, n18 Philadelphia,
n19 Cincinnati, n20  [*2400]  New Orleans, n21 Seattle, n22 Baltimore, n23
Cleveland, n24 and Newark n25 have all entered into either a judicial decree or
a similar form of settlement process. Two cities, Boston and Oakland, did not
wait for litigation, but engaged expert consultants; in both cases, the
consultant isolated evidence of racial discrimination in street policing. n26

   The debate over SQF is heated in part because of disagreement about how the
core moral wrong of intensive street policing (if one exists) should be
conceived. The law provides a starting point for this inquiry, but ultimately
not a satisfying answer.

   The legal framework employed by many of the aforementioned settlements and
consent decrees is modeled on a body of black-letter constitutional doctrine
that is focused centrally on the motivations and beliefs of specific, individual
officers. For  [*2401]  example, in New York, the case of Floyd v. City of New
York, which has yielded the only extensive judicial decision on SQF, focused
first on the Supreme Court's 1968 decision Terry v. Ohio, n27 which held that
officers need "reasonable, articulable suspicion" of criminality to make a
nonconsensual street-stop consistent with the Fourth Amendment. n28 Then, citing
the Supreme Court's 1979 decision in Personnel Administrator v. Feeney, n29 the
Floyd court held that plaintiffs had to show that SQF not only had a racially
disparate effect, but had been adopted "at least in part "because of,' not
merely "in spite of,' its adverse effects upon" certain racial groups. n30

   Other consent decrees and settlements are also crafted in the shadow of Terry
and Feeney. The Seattle settlement is typical in commanding that the police
department adopt a street-stop policy that "explicitly conforms to
constitutional requirements," that officers be annually trained on "Fourth
Amendment and related law," and that patrolling police act "free of unlawful
bias." n31 Similarly, the Philadelphia settlement condemns "stops, frisks, or
searches ... made without the requisite reasonable suspicion" and envisages
"policies and practices to ensure that stops and frisks are not conducted on the
basis of the race or ethnic origin of the suspect, except where the law permits
race or ethnic origin to be considered ... ." n32

   This individualist black-letter doctrine means that even absent litigation to
a final judgment, courts and legal reform efforts have to use a relatively
narrow lens trained solely upon discrete, interpersonal transactions. Similarly,
the dominant economic model of racial bias in policing focuses on the
identification of individual officers' taste-based discrimination over and above
statistical discrimination. n33

    [*2402]  This Article argues that SQF presents a normative challenge that is
not well captured by the individualistic lens of Terry and Feeney, or by a focus
on taste-based discrimination as a more general matter. The distinctive moral
harm of SQF does not turn on racial animus per Feeney, or weak evidentiary
predicates per Terry although both might well exist and even be pervasive on the
ground. This harm, indeed, does not arise within the narrow, individualist
"transactional frame" that currently dominates both law and economics. n34

   SQF today is defined by its large scale and "group-based" application. n35
Its distinctive moral wrong is inextricably related to this programmatic
quality, not the happenstance of individual officers' motives. n36 The core of
this wrong is structural. Accordingly, the welfarist analysis I propose in Part
I is focused on the large-scale, programmatic use of SQF as observed in New
York, Chicago, and Philadelphia. In contrast, I have no cavil with the retail
use of Terry stops as an element of nonprogrammatic street policing. When
operationalized at a large scale, however, SQF is an important link in the
reproduction of social and racial stratification. In this regard, it typically
has large regressive distributional effects and surprisingly little value-added
as a crime control measure.

   More specifically, SQF should be understood as a historically situated
innovation that responds to late twentieth-century urban pathologies in a manner
that predictably perpetuates those criminogenic pathologies. The call for SQF
arose in important measure because local and state governments had  [*2403]
engaged in policies that over time fostered minority neighborhoods that remain
entrenched in concentrated poverty and suffer from high violent-crime rates.
Rather than addressing those underlying conditions, local and state
policy-makers have chosen to respond with a policy that has stigmatizes minority
residents, that has limited crime-control benefits, and that imposes large
negative spillovers on disadvantaged neighborhoods.

   Viewed in this dynamic perspective, SQF catalyzes an entangled set of
individual and neighborhood-level harms. Through mutually reinforcing
interactions, these various harms reinforce the social and racial stratification
that initially set the stage for massive street policing expenditures. Without a
clear grasp of this ecological and dynamic context, current remedial
interventions are likely to fall short or to go astray.

   In response to such ecological and dynamic dimensions, constitutional law is
now disarmed. Some other tool is needed. Consistent with a growing body of
scholarship that resists the narrow transactional frame of current
constitutional doctrine n37 and the dominant doctrinal focus on individual
officials' fault, n38 I argue that our current doctrinal models for capturing
the harms of aggressive policing fall woefully short. Instead, a more structural
and capacious legal framework is needed to encapsulate the core moral objections
to SQF.

   An alternative, more promising legal framework is a version of the
disparate-impact standard familiar from the employment discrimination n39 and
fair housing contexts. n40 A disparate-impact  [*2404]  framework is better able
to account for the evidentiary problems involved in accounting for the diverse
forms of discrimination manifested in a complex system characterized by a high
degree of diffused discretion. n41

   To be clear, this alternative approach is by no means perfect. It does not
provide a proxy for the thorough evaluation of both costs and benefits presented
in this Article. Rather, disparate impact isolates a subset of problematic cases
in which SQF's heavy burden is asymmetrically assigned to minority communities.
It demands a robust justification from the state for that potentially
regressive, subordinating, and demoralizing situation. In this regard, it is
better placed than either Fourth Amendment or Equal Protection doctrine to
resist the exacerbation of racial hierarchies. n42

   No theory of liability, however, will be a comprehensive panacea to a complex
and entrenched social phenomenon like concentrated, racialized, poverty.
Disparate-impact liability for SQF captures the instances in which the moral
wrong of SQF is at its acme (even if it does not capture all instances in which
that wrong arises). It helps ensure that policing responses make matters no
worse. It is emphatically only a piece of the larger mosaic of needful policing
reform that ought to be pursued through both judicial and political avenues.

   Disparate-impact liability is often overlooked because it has not been part
of Equal Protection doctrine since the early 1970s. n43 Because of the
Constitution-centered focus of much scholarship, it is easy to forget it is
available. But a disparate-impact standard is available under both federal
statutes that  [*2405]  regulate local police departments n44 and also (in
California n45 and Illinois n46 ) state law. n47 The Chicago settlement and the
New Orleans settlement invoke some of these disparate-impact rules as guiding
authorizations. n48 Nevertheless, neither elaborates upon their bare-bone
textual references. As a result, the analytic and practical advantages of a
disparate-impact lens for police remain underappreciated. The theoretical
questions raised by its translation to the policing context also remain poorly
understood.

   My final aim is to show how disparate impact can serve as a lens for
analyzing street policing in practice. To that end, I consider how disparate
racial impacts might be sifted from the granular policing data increasingly
being collected by large police departments as a result of settlements and
consent decrees. n49

   Specifically, I sketch three tractable empirical strategies for identifying
disparate impact in street stop-related policies. First, deployment-related
disparities between beats or districts within a jurisdiction can be measured to
ascertain whether a municipality's overall distribution of policing resources
can be justified on race-neutral grounds. n50 Second, within a given beat
[*2406]  or district, disparities in how stops are allocated among different
ethnic and racial groups can be evaluated. n51 Finally, at the level of given
officers, disparities in the quantum of suspicion deployed for whites and
nonwhites can be assessed by using a range of empirical tools. n52

   By aggregating and contrasting disparities at these different levels, the
empirical approach that I sketch roughly enables a better understanding of the
causes and extent of SQF's disparate impact. That understanding in turn can
serve as a foundation for more targeted, less disruptive, and more effective
remedial interventions.

   These empirical approaches, moreover, enable disparate impact's translation
to the policing context while avoiding the constitutional and practical problems
encountered in the employment discrimination context. For each empirical
approach posited, I consider the range of legitimate exculpatory justifications
that might be offered to diffuse a prima facie finding of racial disparity. n53
I further respond to weaknesses made apparent by disparate impact's extant
operation in other contexts. In the employment discrimination context, for
example, there has been disagreement about how to identify business
justifications that can justify racial disparities, n54 and the magnitude of
ultimate disparities required for liability. n55

    [*2407]  The use of disparate impact in the employment context has also
generated worries about the doctrine's constitutionality n56 and its efficacy in
promoting structural policy change. n57 In translating disparate impact to the
policing context, I consider and reject each of these reasons as a reason for
abandoning the translation.

   The possibility of disparate impact as a template for rethinking urban
policing has yet to be explored in any detail, although an earlier article by
David Sklansky and colleagues touches on the question. n58 But my analysis
aligns with penetrating work by Tracey Meares, Jeffrey Fagan, and Amanda Geller,
all of whom correctly emphasize that SQF is a distinctive mode of urban policing
that cannot be analyzed in terms of discrete interactions because "programmatic
stops are imposed from the top down" at a massive scale. n59 Furthermore, I echo
Richard Banks' worry about the "potential inadequacy as a policy framework" of
much constitutional doctrine, although my  [*2408]  diagnosis and response to
the problem of race in policing differ from his approach. n60

   In addition, my analysis diverges sharply from the large literature on
"racial profiling," n61 which more narrowly focuses on intentional animus or the
purposive use of race as a criterion in enforcement decisions. n62 Unlike these
analyses, my approach does not focus on individual fault or bad intent. Instead,
I argue that legal intervention should be organized around the interaction
between a specific kind of common policing strategy and larger social dynamics
of racial segmentation and stratification. n63

   The argument proceeds in three steps. In Part I, I provide a comprehensive,
empirically robust account of SQF as a distinctive modality of urban policing,
highlighting the dynamic negative effects of SQF upon minority communities in
concentrated urban poverty. Part II turns to the constitutional doctrine
developed pursuant to the Fourth Amendment and the Equal Protection Clause to
regulate such policing. Using Terry  [*2409]  and Feeney as focal points, I
demonstrate that constitutional doctrine systematically fails to account for the
harms that flow from SQF. The gap reveals inconsistencies and internal
contradictions within the doctrine. Having rejected the default framework for
legal analysis of SQF, I sketch in Part III an alternative lens of disparate
impact. Concluding, I illustrate three empirical strategies that might be used
to determine whether remedial intervention is warranted. In so doing, I hope to
show that disparate impact is a practicable and plausible approach for use by
courts and other supervisory and regulatory bodies.

   I. THE COSTS AND BENEFITS OF STOP AND FRISK POLICING

 To evaluate stop and frisk as a way of eliciting public order requires an
understanding of its costs and benefits in historical and social context. This
Part therefore begins by offering a definition of SQF as a historically situated
strategy employed by urban police forces. It then develops a careful tally of
its pros and cons.

   Some courts have analyzed SQF in terms of costs while bracketing its
benefits. n64 I disagree with this approach. Appreciation of the distinctive
wrong of SQF demands a comprehensive understanding of related justifications,
criticisms, and benefits, all nested in an ecological and dynamic context.

   A. Defining Stop and Frisk (SQF)

 Stop, question, and frisk, or SQF, is an urban policing measure that involves
the large-scale deployment of officers in public spaces (e.g., sidewalks,
alleys, the communal outdoor spaces of public housing) tasked with conducting
frequent investigative stops. Under a line of cases beginning with Terry v.
Ohio, n65 an officer is entitled to make a "brief" nonconsensual "investigatory
stop" if she has "a reasonable articulable suspicion"  [*2410]  that a crime
either has occurred or is about to occur. n66 Separately, if the officer has a
further reasonable articulable suspicion that the person stopped is ""armed and
presently dangerous to the officer or to others,' he may conduct a "limited
protective search' for concealed weapons." n67

   In either the stop or the frisk context, reasonable articulable suspicion is
a less demanding standard than probable cause. But it still requires "a minimal
level of objective justification." n68

   In addition to a stop and a frisk, officers may take further actions ranging
from a verbal caution or a citation to an arrest. Arrests vary widely in
character. They can be discretionary or mandatory. n69 They may be based on
conduct or evidence discovered by the officer during the stop, or they might be
predicated on an outstanding warrant revealed when a person's name is
cross-referenced with state, local, or federal databases.

   The jurisprudence of Terry stops and frisks focuses on discrete transactions
between specific officers and specific defendants. But this is misleading. n70
SQF (as I have defined it) is a policy that operates today at scale. Not tens or
hundreds of individuals but tens or hundreds of thousands are arrested over the
course of months. In New York, for example, there were 313,047 documented stops
in 2004 and 576,394 stops in 2009. n71 In Philadelphia, a city with one-fifth
New York's population, there were more than 200,000 stops each of the last three
years  [*2411]  despite the existence of a court-supervised consent decree. n72
The analysis in this Section is focused on SQF as deployed en masse.

   SQF has similarities to, and can overlap somewhat with, the strategy of
"broken windows" or "quality of life" policing. n73 But the tactics are
distinct. Whereas broken windows policing relies on arrests "to remove
undesirable persons from a neighborhood," n74 SQF can involve a relatively low
rate of arrests. n75 SQF tends to be a direct response to violent crime. It is
not a prophylactic response to the possibility that the sight of "broken
windows" will induce escalating forms of disorder. n76 Hence, criticisms of
"broken windows" policing cannot be translated to SQF in any mechanical fashion.

   One more detail is essential to my functional definition of SQF: within a
city, SQF is typically employed with greatest intensity on a small subset of
neighborhoods. n77 Typically, its deployment is highest in neighborhoods
characterized by "concentrated poverty" where crime rates tend to be higher than
in other parts of the city. n78 In Chicago, for example, one study of  [*2412]
stops in 2014 found 266 stops per 1000 residents in the African-American
neighborhood of Englewood, but 43 stops per 1000 residents in the white
neighborhood of Lincoln/Foster. n79

   In particular, SQF tends to be concentrated upon minority - i.e.,
African-American and Hispanic - neighborhoods. In New York, the district court
in Floyd found that the racial composition of a neighborhood was a better
predictor of the density of stops than its lagged crime rate. n80 And at the
height of New York's SQF, an African-American resident of New York City had a
ninety-two percent chance of being stopped in a single year period. n81

   SQF, in short, is not just a high-frequency policing strategy, it is also a
highly geographically concentrated one in minority (African-American and
Hispanic) neighborhoods. So even if it entails a low rate of arrest, therefore,
it is likely that SQF at least contributes to the exceedingly high rates of
minority arrests in the jurisdictions in which it is deployed. n82

   In summary, SQF is best understood as the large-scale use of Terry stops in
predominantly black and Hispanic urban neighborhoods in response to violent
crime. Its architects are cognizant of, and indeed embrace, this racial
asymmetry. n83 But  [*2413]  rather than dwelling on whether their views should
be ranked as invidious discrimination, I engage in a more consequentialist
inquiry: I consider the gains and the harms from SQF. These, I contend, must be
understood in light of geographic and historical context to be appreciated
properly. It is the benefits of SQF that I focus upon first before considering
costs.

   B. The Crime-Control Benefits of SQF in Context

   1. The Case for SQF

 Aggressive use of street stops at a high volume has a long historical pedigree.
n84 By 1969, they had become so endemic that the Kerner Commission, established
by President Johnson to investigate the 1967 urban riots, singled out the
police's excessive use of investigative stops n85 and the "wholesale harassment
by certain elements of the police community, of which minority groups,
particularly Negros, frequently complain." n86 Today's fires are residues of
yesterday's conflagrations.

   SQF in its modern form is a direct response to an uptick of violent crime in
the 1980s collocated with what William Julius Wilson called the persistence of
"ghetto poverty." n87 The political sponsors of the policy consistently
identified violent crime control  [*2414]  as its core aim. n88 Because violent
crime is disproportionately committed by African Americans and concentrated in
black neighborhoods, they argued, it is no surprise that SQF focuses on those
predominantly minority neighborhoods. n89 Rather than proof of anti-minority
animus, the use of SQF is evidence for this view that police are exerting
special efforts to protect minorities from crime. The persuasive force of this
argument from crime control is the subject of this subpart while the tally of
SQF's costs is addressed in the following subpart.

   The genesis of an argument for SQF's crime-control benefits is found in the
early 1990s. In 1994, the sociologist James Q. Wilson published an influential
opinion piece in the New York Times entitled "Just Take Away Their Guns," a
phrase that succinctly encapsulated the distinctive appeal of SQF. n90 Wilson
argued for the aggressive use of Terry stops as a means to "reduce the number of
people who carry guns unlawfully, especially in places - on streets, in taverns
- where the mere presence of a gun can increase the hazards we all face." n91
His call responded directly to what by any measure was a grave crisis of law and
order. At the time, New York City was suffering from a high homicide rate. n92
Of the 1951 murders that occurred in New York in 1993, the year ending as Wilson
wrote, more than 1500 were committed by firearm. n93

   Wilson's call for aggressive street policing as a prophylaxis for gun
violence found a measure of empirical support the following year. In 1995, the
criminologist Lawrence Sherman and colleagues published the results of a
quasi-experiment conducted for twenty-nine weeks in Kansas City of gun-based,
intensive street policing and found a forty-nine percent decline in gun crimes
without any spillover to neighboring areas. n94

    [*2415]  Results of this kind prompted "scores of cities [to] rush[] to
follow the Kansas City model" n95 by seizing upon SQF as a tool for lowering
violent crime rates. The earliest adopter of SQF, New York City, seems to have
begun aggressive use of Terry stops (as distinct from "broken windows" policing)
around 1994. A parallel aggressive use of stops in Philadelphia came to public
attention in 2000 after a scandal involving hundreds of unlawful arrests,
searches, and prosecutions in the 39th Police District led to the disclosure of
incident reports showing a high rate of illegal stops. n96

   In the early 1990s, constitutional litigation over Chicago's "gang loitering"
ordinance in part hinged on the 42,000 stops executed under that measure over
three years. n97 The Chicago Police Department's limited collection of
information about its stops and frisks meant that it was not until 2015 that
data emerged showing that the city's SQF intensity had exceeded its usage
patterns of the 1990s (and, incidentally, also overshot New York City's per
capita stop rates). n98

   Crucially, the policing strategy endorsed by Wilson, and implicitly supported
by the Kansas City evidence, does not lend itself to uniform application across
entire cities. Violent crime in urban contexts has long been closely correlated
with a subset of geographic areas typically characterized by concentrated
poverty. n99 In turn, concentrated urban poverty, both in the 1990s and today,
is not evenly spread across racial ethnic groups. Rather, it is a
disproportionately minority phenomenon. n100  [*2416]  Not only impoverished
African Americans but also black middle-class cohorts are disproportionately
represented in extremely poor urban neighborhoods. n101 One side effect of this
is that urban violent crime impacts minority groups more grievously than
non-minority groups. n102 In 1993, the year before James Wilson wrote his Times
op-ed, the African-American homicide victimization rate per 100,000 population
was 47; the white rate was 6.4. n103 From the perspective of its political
sponsors, SQF has to train upon African-American and Hispanic neighborhoods not
because of some theory of race and crime but because that is where the murders -
the murders of minority citizens - are happening. n104

   If American cities were making progress toward meaningful racial integration,
this nexus between policing and race might be expected to have waned by today.
But despite increasing ethnic and racial diversity within cities, racial
segregation endures in many cities. n105 Indeed, as many American cities are
[*2417]  as "hypersegregated" today as they were in 1970. n106 The experience of
residential segregation, moreover, has remained especially stable for African
Americans regardless of class. Nationally, the proportion of African-American
areas lacking racial diversity has "remained stubbornly set at around 8.6
percent" throughout the 1990s. n107 Even "relatively advantaged" black
neighborhoods "continue to be unique in the degree to which they are spatially
linked with communities of severe concentrated disadvantage." n108

   The argument in favor of SQF, in short, rests on its ability to mitigate the
costs of violent crime particularly associated with urban minority-dominated
neighborhoods. To the extent that areas of concentrated poverty persist in
cities, and to the extent they are predominantly black or Hispanic, SQF might
even be viewed as a form of affirmative action. It is a positive subsidy to
impoverished minority communities, a surplus provision of the public good of
policing. In former New York police Commissioner Ray Kelly's words, the real
problem with urban policing is then that African Americans "are being
understopped" in light of the violent crime experienced by black communities.
n109

   2. The Difficulties of SQF as Violent Crime Control

 The benefits of SQF, however, are more qualified than its advocates suggest. I
analyze here how those benefits are properly characterized before turning to the
policy's costs. Focusing  [*2418]  solely upon SQF's suppression of violent
crime, there are both reasons for skepticism of the magnitude of the ensuing
welfare gain and grounds for treating such benefits as morally problematic.
These concerns, I stress, bear on SQF's efficacy, not the moral urgency of
addressing the hecatomb of contemporary urban homicide in cities such as Chicago
today.

   If there is no convincing evidence that SQF in fact meaningfully improves
policing outcome - and if there is also evidence that it has substantial
deleterious effects - then it should be considered a moral wrong in the same
class as employment discrimination or housing segregation. Moreover, evidence
that SQF imposes concentrated costs on minority populations without remotely
commensurate benefits points toward the need for a distinct, programmatic remedy
such as disparate impact liability.

   I highlight four interrelated grounds for concern. First, the evidence for an
absolute crime-control effect from SQF is surprisingly fragile. Second, the
evidence of a marginal effect from SQF in comparison to other methods is
nonexistent. What evidence exists suggests many of the crime-control benefits of
SQF might be obtained without its aggregate, racially disparate aspect. Third,
and relatedly, the claim that SQF disproportionately benefits African Americans
rests on complex and controversial assumptions. Finally, even assuming firm
evidence of large crime-control gains from SQF, there is a normative objection
to the state taking credit for those benefits when the governmental entities
responsible for SQF also contributed to minority segregation into neighborhoods
of concentrated poverty.

   First, notwithstanding Sherman's Kansas City study, "it is very difficult to
connect [SQF] to any crime reduction." n110 Two subsequent efforts at
replicating the former study, in Indianapolis and Pittsburgh, have produced
ambivalent results. n111 The Indianapolis study, for example, found that
homicide rates decreased in one of two treatment areas, but remained unchanged
in the other. n112 Its authors concluded that the "present state of  [*2419]
knowledge does not allow us to answer the theoretical questions of what produced
the effects observed in Kansas City." n113

   A meta-analysis of six policing experiments involving increased police
patrols in North and South America reexamined the Pittsburgh data. This data
found that while the earlier studies had found a statistically significant
reduction in gun violence, alternative specifications "strongly suggest[] the
estimated drop in shots-fired incidents was due at least in part to a
preintervention trend, a seasonal pattern, or chance." n114 Nevertheless, the
authors of the meta-study found themselves ultimately "generally favorable" to
the method pioneered in Kansas City, even as they raised substantial concern as
to whether Sherman's experiment could be scaled up beyond the level of small
neighborhoods. n115

   In an operational context, SQF fares less well. Rigorous empirical studies of
SQF's post-1994 deployment are rare. Existing results, though, provide sparse
support for its crime-control effects. For example, a study of the effects of
SQF on burglary and robbery rates in New York between 2003 and 2010 found "few
significant effects." n116 Another quantitative study of New York found that
"the number of shooting incidents was virtually unchanged during the years in
which stops and frisks grew at an extraordinary rate," suggesting that it was
"extremely unlikely that these stops could have reduced the homicide rate by
reducing gun ownership or carrying." n117

    [*2420]  The most detailed and comprehensive study of overall trends in
recent crime rates in New York, by Franklin Zimring, also concluded that in the
New York City context, "there is no way to separately measure the value added by
aggressive intervention in New York City." n118

   A leading criminologist and the paramount expect on New York policing,
Zimring has seemed of two minds about street policing in general. On the one
hand, he has identified "aggressive" measures such as hot-spot policing, the
elimination of open-air drug markets, and firearm reduction as "probably"
successful. n119 On the other hand, he has been much more confident that "data
driven crime mapping and patrol strategy management" and the hiring of police
officers did likely have large and negative effects on crime rates. n120 At the
very best, Zimring's evidence leaves open the possibility that SQF had some role
to play in crime reduction. It casts little light on the magnitude of that role,
and it has little to say about whether the same gains in public order might have
been achieved through alternate means.

   Another potential means of examining SQF's impact is to examine the aftermath
of the policy's unexpected discontinuance. But there has also been no detailed
study of what happened after the New York City Police Department reduced the
number of stops dramatically in 2013. In the three years after that decline
began, however, murder rates have remained "essentially flat." n121

   In Chicago, a different and more complicated story prevails. A sharp rise in
murder and decline in arrests followed the November 2015 release of
long-suppressed video footage of a fatal police shooting that provoked sharp
public outcry against the Chicago Police Department. n122 Immediately
thereafter, in  [*2421]  January 2016, changes to how stops and frisks are
recorded - but no change to operational policy - went into effect. n123 Given
that the highly critical public reaction to the video likely had a significant
effect on multiple aspects of police morale and hence police behavior, it is
hard to disentangle any discrete effect from changes in SQF policy from changes
due to the critical public reaction to the demoralizing release of evidence of
unlawful police violence. Those who rush to judgment or seek to cast blame based
on the Chicago (or New York) data trends may well be ensnared unwittingly in a
species of motivated reasoning.

   The empirical case for a crime-control benefit from SQF, in short, does not
stand on strong foundations. n124 While there is some empirical support for an
effect from SQF in small-scale experiments, there is no existing evidence that
this effect can be replicated at a citywide level. n125 The weakness of its
evidentiary predicate contrasts with firmer evidentiary basis for other kinds of
reform, including the deployment of more officers and the use of more
data-driven approaches. More than forty years after Wilson's initial
intervention, therefore, SQF remains largely predicated on a mere prediction
about the effect of intensive street stops on violent crime levels.

   Second, econometric studies of SQF's effect on crime of the kind discussed
above aim to isolate the marginal effect of the policy after controlling for all
other relevant variables. In effect, they strive to hold all else constant and
then search for an effect  [*2422]  of SQF on crime rates. But the assumption
that all else remains constant is an obvious artifice. A police force that
foregoes SQF is likely to employ an alternative policing strategy that does not
involve nonconsensual interventions or facially racial disparities in treatment.
The marginal negative effect on crime-control of shifting from SQF to an
alternative modality of policing is likely to be smaller than the absolute
effect of simply foregoing SQF entirely. A police force that chooses to forego
SQF can redeploy the substantial personnel resources that it occupies for other
tactical uses.

   There are, moreover, other modalities of policing that are positively
associated with crime control in rigorous empirical studies. Consider, for
example, the empirical literature on "hot-spot policing," a technique that has
some parallels with SQF, but that can also be distinguished from it. Hot-spot
policing involves "the application of police interventions at very small
geographic units of analysis." n126 A range of studies and meta-studies suggests
that the highly localized deployment of officers has a meaningful and
statistically significant effect on crime rates. n127

   Hot-spot policing and SQF have some similarities, but their differences are
critical. To begin, there is a question of scale. I have already stressed more
than once that SQF (as I use the term) involves tens or hundreds of thousands of
arrests. Hot-spot policing does not require similarly massive deployments. The
one study of an existing SQF policy to consider the question concluded that
deployments tended to occur across areas that were too large to be characterized
as "hot spots" as that term is technically used. n128 Even if the distinction in
scale  [*2423]  between SQF and hot-spot policing is hard to quantify, in
practice it seems easy enough to draw. n129

   Moreover, hot-spot policing does not require stops, let alone frisks or
arrests to be effective. There is instead evidence that "increased police
presence alone" dampens crime rates, and the "strongest" impact is associated
with "situational prevention" strategies, that "disrupt situational dynamics
that allow crime to occur," for example by "razing abandoned buildings." n130
One study of street stops at "microgeographic" hot spots examined in one-week
increments in New York generated reductions in crime, but cautioned that
"evidence suggests that crime prevention can be achieved without resorting to an
unrestricted SQF policy." n131 In this New York data, moreover, SQF was pursued
"at the expense" of other strategies, leaving open questions about the
"potential of other policing strategies." n132

   Hot spot policing plainly requires a nontrivial number of officers. So it is
important to emphasize that my argument here solely concerns the style of
policing, not the sheer volume of officers deployed. n133 And increasing stops
or arrests, do not appear to be a necessary component of hot-spot policing. To
the contrary, in one leading study, the authors noted approvingly that officers
in the treatment condition (i.e., engaged in hot-  [*2424]  spot policing) were
not evaluated on their stop count, but rather were held "accountable for
reducing citizen calls for service and for ameliorating social and physical
incivilities in targeted hot-spot areas." n134 A recent meta-analysis of
nineteen studies of hot-spot policing separately examined the effects of two
distinct versions of that policy that involved either increasing the volume of
traditional policing or using a problem-solving approach. n135 Three of the ten
existing studies of the traditional policing model found small positive effects
on crime reduction. n136 But the overall mean effect size of problem-oriented
hot-spot policing was twice the effect size of the traditional policing model.
n137 It would seem that the decision to simply increase traditional policing
activities at hot spots is dominated in practice by problem-solving measures.

   The contrast between SQF and hot-spot policing usefully underscores a more
general point: policing is not a single, undifferentiated public good. Rather,
policing is mutative and takes several forms. It can entail the pursuit of
diverse ends of crime-control, order-maintenance, and social provision, with
divergent tools. n138 Police forces now engaged in SQF have at other times
employed other, quite different approaches, which focus instead on service
provision, n139 community relations, n140 or prophylactic street policing. Some
of these policies aim to reduce crime; others, such as community policing, seek
to "build[] a reservoir of public support" to tap in moments of strain. n141
These different services can be bundled in different ways. In at least some of
the jurisdictions in which SQF is employed, neighborhoods subject to aggressive
street policing do not necessarily  [*2425]  receive high levels of other
policing services. n142 Indeed, racial segregation at the municipal level is
systematically correlated to depressed levels of public service provision. n143

   In Chicago, for example, African-American and Hispanic neighborhoods are
subject to SQF on the one hand, but on the other hand experience substantially
longer delays than non-minority neighborhoods when seeking police aid via 911
calls. n144 Policing is thus both under-supplied and over-provided
simultaneously.

   Defenders of SQF therefore mislead when they equate SQF with a police force
"focusing its resources where people most need protection." n145 Rather, it is
both possible - and in fact often seems to be the case - that SQF is accompanied
by serious deficiencies in respect to other elements of the bundle of police
services. Estimation of the margin costs of ending SQF must as a result account
for the possibility of variance across these other elements of the police
function.

   Third, the assumption of SQF's advocates, particularly in New York, has been
that its benefits accrue to the minority residents of high-crime neighborhoods
more than they accrue to residents of low-crime neighborhoods. n146 Implicitly,
these advocates are drawing a comparison between SQF and affirmative action.
Both, they suggest, are policies that disproportionately benefit
African-American and Hispanic minorities.

   But consider another possibility: since the 1960s, the fear of crime has been
a concern that has powerfully mobilized white electorates. n147 It may be that
among the gains of SQF is a reduction in the fear of crime, n148 and that this
gain is diffused  [*2426]  among the wider urban population. The latter, of
course, is typically much larger than the urban subpopulation subject to SQF.
Even assuming there is a substantial marginal crime-control gain in substituting
SQF for the next-best policy, n149 it is necessarily the case that whereas the
(predominantly minority) residents of impoverished neighborhoods experience both
costs and benefits, the (predominantly white) non-residents of other
neighborhoods experience only benefits (albeit in expectation at a much lower
rate). There are also likely to be many more white non-residents of targeted
areas than minority non-residents. The former group benefits from being able to
access more of the city, as well as from a more general reduction in their fear
of crime. n150

   Depending on the magnitude of these various costs and benefits for different
racial groups, it is at least possible that the adoption of SQF might create
larger net benefits for the class of white nonresidents as a whole than for the
class of minority residents of highly policed neighborhoods in a manner that is
racially regressive - even without accounting for the potential costs of SQF.
n151

   The claim that SQF disproportionately benefits minorities is an important
part of the moral case in favor of the policy. Closer examination of the
assumptions underlying the claim, however, uncovers its contingency. It is
hardly clear that - again, even bracketing the costs of SQF - it is true that a
disproportionate share of the social benefits of SQF run to minority  [*2427]
communities. Much depends on the welfare effects from crime reductions and from
mitigation of crime-related fears.

   Fourth, the final reason for skepticism of the positive case for SQF based on
its crime-control effects is not based on empirical data or calculations of its
welfare-related consequences. Rather, it is moral in nature, and depends on a
distinctive (and controversial) moral logic: the idea that "no one shall be
permitted to profit by his own fraud, or to take advantage of his own wrong, or
to found any claim upon his own iniquity, or to acquire property by his own
crime." n152

   Applying that concededly raw intuition to the case of SQF reveals the
following line of argument: The problem of violent crime to which SQF responds
flows from the existence of neighborhoods of concentrated (and racialized)
poverty. Although there are many forces molding the latter, governmental actors
at the state and local level have a large share of responsibility. Those same
governmental bodies (if not the exact same individual politicians) also resorted
to SQF. n153

   But having exposed minority communities to the harm of high violent crime
rates, governmental bodies cannot then "take advantage" of this wrong to seek a
measure of legal and policy leeway that they otherwise would not have. At a
minimum, they should elect the policing strategy that imposes the minimum burden
on minority communities that as a result of persisting state policy have been
subjected to concentrated poverty and high crime rates. Policing, that is,
should be subject to a Hippocratic constraint.

   The threshold premise of this argument - that states and localities bear a
measure of responsibility for concentrated, minority poverty - has substantial
support in the historical and empirical literature. To be sure,
"macrostructural" forces such as the deindustrialization of central cities and
the exit of some middle-class and wealthy African Americans have driven the
growth of concentrated, racialized poverty. n154 But these forces  [*2428]  have
been magnified by "deliberate policy decisions to concentrate minorities and the
poor in public housing." n155

   In Chicago, for example, alderman and the mayor thwarted efforts from the
1940s onward to disperse African Americans outside traditionally black
neighborhoods. n156 Across the country, zoning restrictions and permitting
requirements have been extensively deployed to perpetuate racially
"exclusionary" residential patterns. n157

   The implications of state involvement in the creation of concentrated
racialized poverty turn on the sort of moral fault one attributes to a
collective entity such as a municipality, the precise mix of state action and
private actions responsible for residential segregation, and the extent to which
any historical responsibility is mitigated by the passage of time and the
burdens that remediation would impose on innocent third-parties. n158 I do not
aim to resolve that complex suite of questions here. Rather, my more limited
claim is that a city's claims on behalf of SQF must at a minimum be
contextualized by its  [*2429]  general historical responsibility for the
burdens imposed by concentrated poverty, particularly on the racial minorities
whose efforts to move beyond that condition in search of employment and
educational opportunities have so often been thwarted. n159 At an absolute
minimum, it would seem appropriate to demand a heightened burden of proof for
claims about the benefits of disparate crime-control measures tendered by the
very entity responsible for racial segregation.

   Stated in brief then, my fourth point is that the institutional author of
racial segregation should do no further harm to minorities when it addresses the
costs of such segregation. Having created the problem that SQF is intended to
address, municipalities have no entitlement to a benefit of empirical doubt.
More ambitiously, cities' partial culpability for the underlying condition of
concentrated poverty might justify a demand for special efforts to ensure that
no policy response to crime imposes a disproportionate share of costs on the
legatees of historical discrimination, or that denies them a disproportionate
share of its benefits.

   To summarize then, this Section has examined the crime-control benefits of
SQF. The evidence for those is surprisingly fragile. The case for thinking SQF
has marginal benefits in comparison to a next-best policy option such as
hot-spot policing is even shakier. Accounting for SQF's more diffuse effect on
the fear of crime, moreover, suggests that defenses of SQF as a form of
affirmative action may well fail. Finally, an analysis based on the state's
historical responsibilities for the underlying conditions that motivate SQF
suggests a need to view the state's celebration of the policy's benefits with a
measure of skepticism.

   C. The Ecological and Dynamic Costs of SQF

 This Section turns from SQF's putative benefits to its costs. In my view, SQF
has an intertwined set of individual and collective costs that largely (but not
exclusively) sound in an equality-related rather than a Fourth Amendment
register. My starting assumption is that SQF's costs, no less than its benefits,
cannot be properly understood or evaluated once they are detached from the
historical origins of concentrated poverty.  [*2430]  Nor can they be evaluated
without thinking carefully about the ways in which SQF might perpetuate the
underlying conditions of social and racial stratification into concentrated
poverty. In short, rather than analyzing racial discrimination as a
"single-point outcome," I embrace here the dominant emphasis in recent
sociological scholarship on "modeling discrimination as a process." n160

   I identify eight pathways by which SQF can impose harms on individuals and
communities defined by race. I began the analysis of costs by focusing on the
immediate encounter between police and an individual. Having documented costs in
that proximate context, I then widen my lens to capture a diverse array of
adverse spillovers from that immediate encounter, not only to the individual,
but also for his or her social network, and (for racial minorities) his or her
larger racial cohort.

   The latter effects of SQF, it should be noted, diffuse through social
networks and families. n161 Several critically depend upon "vicious cycles," or
positive feedback mechanisms that entangle individual and neighborhood-level
effects, n162 often with regressive distributive consequences. More generally,
it is plausible to view all eight causal pathways as intertwined and, to an
extent, mutually reinforcing.

   First, the Supreme Court in Terry recognized that even brief stops and frisks
have immediate and substantial costs. Chief Justice Warren described even a
temporary police stop as "a serious intrusion upon the sanctity of the person,
which may inflict great indignity and arouse strong resentment, and it is not to
be undertaken lightly." n163 In subsequent cases, however, the Court has tended
to downplay the immediate psychological and dignitary costs of being stopped.
n164

    [*2431]  But ethnographic data and qualitative studies demonstrate that
Chief Justice Warren's initial intuition was correct. The immediate toll of a
nonconsensual police intrusion - even absent physical content or formal
consequence - is substantial. Perhaps the best evidence derives from a recent
survey of 1200 young men in New York conducted by Amanda Geller and colleagues.
The latter found that contact with the police (primarily in the form of Terry
stops) was consistently associated with persisting "stigma," "trauma,"
"anxiety," and "depressive symptoms." n165

   On reflection, it should be no surprise that these effects flow from a Terry
stop. The latter is an unexpected encounter with heavily armed police, typically
characterized by a sense of utter helplessness and a sharp fear of violence and
deadly force. n166 This fear may be amplified by a worry of more prolonged
detention, a real concern in a jurisdiction where police have arrest quotas to
fill. n167 This psychological toll is not immediately visible. It may be
shameful even to confess. These are, perhaps, the least troubling explanations
for why such costs have largely fallen out of judicial accounts of SQF.

   Second, a different, racial asymmetry afflicts judicial consideration of the
risks of bodily harm attendant on a Terry stop. On the one hand, the Court has
punctiliously attended to the risk of bodily harm to officers during a stop.
n168 On the other hand, the Court has been largely silent about the possibility
that Terry stops expose the individual subject to police attention to a
substantial risk of physical violence. n169

    [*2432]  Nor has it accounted for the possibility that these risks will be
positively correlated with minority status. Recent empirical work by Roland
Fryer using the Terry-stop-related records of New York's police found "large
racial differences" in police use of "non-lethal force," including slapping,
grabbing, and pushing individuals into a wall or onto the ground. n170 Even
assuming perfectly compliant behavior, African Americans were twenty-one percent
more likely to experience force than whites. n171 In Chicago, Wesley Skogan has
found higher rates of nonlethal force in the context of stops of blacks than in
white citizen stops. n172

   Given such large racial differentials in the use of force, it would hardly be
surprising if a large proportion of the innocent minority residents of
high-crime neighborhood who are stopped and frisked objected to aggressive SQF
even if it had public safety benefits that diffused to their benefit. n173

   Third, the effects of Terry stops on the individuals subjected to police
attention do not expire when their participants are released from police
control. Rather, negative experiences with the police breed cynicism about the
law, n174 an unwillingness to invoke the police's aid, and a diminished
proclivity to comply with the law or cooperate with legal authorities. The
connections between negative police treatment and strongly aversive views of the
police are empirically well grounded, albeit not in  [*2433]  contexts where SQF
has been implemented. n175 But studies from the specific cities where SFQ is
employed demonstrate vividly that intensive street policing has lingering
effects on the dispositions and upon the beliefs of any population routinely
subject to its rigors.

   For instance, a recent qualitative study of young men living in three
high-crime neighborhoods in Philadelphia found that less than ten percent were
willing to call the police "in any circumstance," in part because many had
themselves had negative experiences with the police in the past. n176 Tellingly,
the same study also found resentment directed at police because of their failure
to respond to 911 calls in a timely fashion. n177 Police, that is, are not seen
reflexively in a negative light: it is their intrusive and disrespectful
behavior toward minority citizens in particular, coupled with their failure to
provide non-coercive public safety, that elicits negative perceptions of the
badge.

    [*2434]  This study, however, focused on negative experiences of police,
rather than the mere fact of being stopped. Although the Philadelphia study
suggests that young men in particular perceive police contact generally as
negative, it does not test for different effects of any police contact. n178 In
contrast, a recent study in New York, examining young subjects specifically in
areas affected by SQF, found that increasing experience of stops (whether
negative or positive experiences) diminished perceptions of police legitimacy.
n179 Another study in Chicago has found not only that African Americans have
"strikingly" lower levels of trust in police, but "those caught up in
enforcement and investigative stops were less trusting of police" by almost
forty-five percent. n180 A larger body of empirical findings from the United
States and beyond demonstrates that diminished police legitimacy is associated
with a diminished disposition to follow the law and a lesser willingness to
cooperate with police. n181

   Relatedly, a high volume of stops concentrated in a specific geographically
locale can create a vicious-circle feedback loop that flows from individual
legal cynicism to increased collective victimization, and then back again.

   When police are perceived as endorsing excessive force against racial
minorities, members of that minority population tend to become more reluctant to
seek police aid. In a time-series study of how highly publicized incidents of
police violence in Milwaukee influenced the use of 911, Matthew Desmond, Andrew
Papachristos and David Kirk found that such incidents  [*2435]  have a "clear
and significant [negative] impact on citizen crime reporting." n182 Other
studies have found that when SQF is perceived as being distributed on racial
grounds (perhaps because African Americans and Hispanics are in fact at a much
greater per capita risk of being stopped than whites n183 ), cynicism about the
law and police is likely to be sharpened within minority communities. At the
margin, violations of the law become more frequent. n184 As the expected risk of
being victimized rises, therefore, residents of heavily policed areas become
less willing to proactively reach out to police. This further lowers the
expected cost of criminality, rather than alleviating it as SQF's advocates
hoped. n185 More crime in turn leads to more aggressive SQF, which starts the
cycle anew.

   A version of one element of this dynamic has been termed the "Ferguson
effect." This rather loaded term captures the possibility that high-visibility
instances of police misconduct lead to increases in crime because of reduced
confidence in police or because of increased risk-averseness on police's part.
Evidence for a broad Ferguson effect, however, is weak and is confined to
certain crimes in certain cities. n186 If further evidence were to emerge of
such an effect, it would nevertheless strengthen the vicious circle argument
developed in the previous paragraphs.

   Fourth is yet another vicious circle related to legal cynicism: if minorities
have consistently negative views of the police,  [*2436]  and respond to stops
accordingly, police may come to anticipate more resistance from those
minorities. Shared police expectations of a greater risk of African-American
violence in response to a police stop is one potential explanation for the
higher rates of force for black suspects that Fryer finds in the New York SQF
data. n187 Consistent with this possibility, greater perceived minority threat
appears to predict higher levels of police use of force, controlling for other
relevant predictors. n188 Appearances, in this way, influence realities. n189
The perception of racial disproportionality in stops, on this theory, influences
individual residents' behavior, which in the aggregate creates racial
differences in violence by police. This of course merely strengthens minorities'
negative expectations of police. n190 In this way, large racial disparities in
the physical harms associated with SQF can be reconciled with the "nearly
uniform support for the principle of equal treatment" found in polling data.
n191

   Fifth, just as legal cynicism leads to higher victimization rates, so too can
the carceral consequences of SQF have negative effects. "More punitive police
enforcement and parole surveillance" leads to a higher frequency of repeat
admissions from a given neighborhood, which "begets more incarceration," which
in turn begets more crime. n192 To the extent SQF does not result in arrests or
incarceration, of course, this dynamic is forestalled.

   Sixth, SQF might solidify stereotypical assumptions about the correlation of
race and criminality. When neighborhoods targeted for SQF are predominantly
African American and  [*2437]  Hispanic, SQF is likely to strengthen the widely
shared perception of a connection between race and crime. n193 Careful empirical
studies have demonstrated that the racial composition of a neighborhood already
provides a cue for people's estimates of its disorderly character n194 and its
crime rate. n195 SQF, especially when explicitly justified on the basis of black
criminality, works as an official imprimatur upon this popular stereotype. And
by instantiating state policy on the basis of that spurious correlation, it
deepens and ratifies racial stereotypes that predate any known disparity in
crime rates and invidious generalizations that depend not on empirics, but
rather on profound (and harmful) assumptions about racial differences. n196

   Consistent with this dynamic, empirical evidence already suggests that
suspects with darker skin pigmentation are more likely to identified as criminal
n197 and punished more severely n198 than similarly situated lighter-toned
suspects. It may also be that the tighter perceived correlation between race and
criminality reinforces residential segregation, by "marking off "black' from
"white' neighborhoods." n199

   Seventh, another probable effect of SQF is a dampening of civil participation
by residents of affected neighborhoods in  [*2438]  ways that, over time,
conduce to diminished collective political power. Important recent work by Amy
Lerman and Vesla Weaver has demonstrated empirically that contact with the
criminal justice system, including nonconsensual stops, has a substantial and
statistically significant effect on trust in government. n200 In one national
sample, "the probability of voting declined by 8 percent for those who have been
stopped." n201 Once again, there is a potent vicious circle in operation here:
SQF is a form of policing that allocates most of its costs to minorities living
in concentrated poverty. But the downstream effect of a high stop rate is that
roughly one in ten of those subjected to SQF become less likely to vote. Like
felon disenfranchisement laws, SQF thus has the effect of sapping low-income
minority communities' influence on public policy and on the political
distribution of valued public goods, n202 even as it purports to empower those
communities.

   Eighth, and finally, is yet another potential aggregate-level effect - this
time upon the level of "collective efficacy" within a neighborhood. Developed by
the Harvard sociologist Robert Sampson, the concept of collective efficacy
involves "the linkage of mutual trust and the shared willingness to intervene."
n203 In repeated studies, high levels of collective efficacy have been found to
boost "neighborhoods[' ability] to realize the common values of residents and
maintain effective social controls is a major source of neighborhood variation
in violence" and in particular homicide. n204 Although there is no study of the
effect of  [*2439]  SQF on levels of collective efficacy, there is little reason
to think it will be positive. If contact with the police breeds legal cynicism,
intracommunal violence, anxiety, and an unwillingness to engage politically, it
is hard to see how it could foster collective efficacy. If that is so, SQF
suppresses a key determinant of public safety within neighborhoods.

   In considering these eight pathways, it is important to note that in many
respects, their effects are likely endure across generations. Most impoverished
African-American youth, as well as a "significant" proportion of middle-income
ones, live in urban neighborhoods of concentrated poverty of the kind subject to
SQF. n205 SQF is likely pivotal in the formation of many minority children's
understandings of their status and possibilities in America, an effect
compounded by the further fact that one in four black children already
experiences parental incarceration. n206 To think that SQF's structural harms
will be transient, therefore, is to be far too optimistic.

   This is a long list. Its items, though, should not be viewed in isolation.
Rather, these mechanisms operate in simultaneous and overlapping ways. All of
these pathways generate costs concentrated on the minority individuals and
communities in which SQF is imposed. In this, their effects are intersecting and
cumulative. Impoverished minority individuals, and through them their
communities, become more demoralized, alienated, anxious, crime-ridden, and
politically powerless. The net effect of SQF's eight costs, therefore, is
singular: it is to maintain and even deepen social and geographic schisms that
separate neighborhoods and racial groups.

   It is for this reason that SQF cannot be understood as merely an
individual-level intervention. It sets in motion a range of important social
processes, largely detrimental to the shared interests of a neighborhood and a
racial group, in ways that reiterate and recapitulate extant racial and social
hierarchies.

    [*2440]  These dynamics, finally, may help explain the surprising lack of
empirical evidence of crime reduction from SQF. n207 At an aggregate level,
communities subject to SQF are likely to see their political efficacy, their
collective efficacy, and their shared commitment to the law wither. One effect
of these changes is an expected increase in levels of crime. This may offset
whatever gains the direct application of SQF achieves partially or in full. SQF,
in short, is a short-term panacea that in the medium-term may well prove
self-defeating.

   D. The Distinctive Moral Wrong of SQF

 This Part has so far provided a definition and analysis of the positives and
negatives of SQF with the aim of refashioning the case against SQF. Rather than
cabining the inquiry by imposing artificial constitutional categories at the
threshold, I have identified both individual and neighborhood-level costs and
benefits. With a clear picture of both positives and negatives in hand, it is
possible to recapitulate the argument against SQF in a more nuanced form. To be
sure, absent precise quantification of both costs and benefits, that argument
necessarily has a provisional aspect. I have no proof that the policy's costs
exceed its benefits. Nevertheless, I view the weakness of benefit-related
evidence and the accumulation of cost-related evidence as sufficiently clear to
suggest that a working account of the distinctive moral wrong of SQF is
feasible.

   The core of the case against SQF is dynamic and ecological in character. It
rests on the policy's effect not just on the specific persons stopped by police
on the street, but on the dynamic role that SQF plays in the social and racial
stratifications that concatenate with each other to create urban residential
segregation. It is an analysis, moreover, that proceeds without making any
assumption of racial animus or individual officer fault.

   In the early 1990s, SQF was adopted as a response to rising violent crime
associated with minority-dominated neighborhoods characterized by concentrated
poverty. In that respect, it was at its origin a response to an unexpected
externality from the urban residential segregation that had been promoted by
state actors from World War II onward.

    [*2441]  Local and state officials might have taken another path. n208 From
the 1960s onwards, historian Elizabeth Hinton has demonstrated, national and
local politics gradually "blended opportunity, development, and training
programs of the War on Poverty with the surveillance, patrol, and detention
programs of the War on Crime." n209 By the 1980s, however, the War on Crime
"would eventually completely supplant" Great Society antipoverty programs as a
solution to urban discontent. n210 Non-coercive solutions, in short, had already
been tabled by the time the crime wave of the late 1980s and early 1990s was in
full flush. n211

   Nevertheless, the policy response to that crime-wave has had ironically
limited crime-control-related payoff, while at the same time ratifying racial
stereotypes, emasculating minority communities politically, and exacerbating
their social and political weaknesses. Especially given the backdrop of
municipal policies that consciously enabled and entrenched the urban ghetto,
this policy choice was a morally problematic one. It was, in effect, a choice by
the state to exacerbate a form of racial stratification for which the state
itself bears large moral (if not constitutional) responsibility.

   SQF is thus but one link in a larger "process" n212 of social and racial
stratification in ways that extend well beyond the discrete effects of an
isolated encounter between one officer and one resident. n213 Given its exiguous
benefits (shared across the  [*2442]  whole of society) and its multifarious
costs (largely concentrated within already-impoverished minority communities),
it is hard to imagine that SQF would have anything but regressive distributive
effects as between racial groups. n214

   On the assumption that my judgments about the relative magnitude of costs and
benefits are sustained, therefore, I believe that SQF can fairly be
characterized as "a systemic and institutional phenomenon that reproduces racial
inequality and the presumption of black and brown criminality." n215 It is one
of the mechanisms by which racial division in American society is produced and
reproduced.

   Given this characterization, I resist claims that the problem of race in
policing is a distraction, and that it would be better to focus reforming
energies on (say) the problem of mass incarceration n216 or structural
inequality. n217 SQF - even absent any racial animus - cannot be separated from
larger processes of subordination along social and racial lines, and efforts to
distinguish the two phenomena are deeply misguided.

   Equally beside the point are claims that SQF is based on an accurate
generalization about racial minorities' criminality. n218 Such background
regularities are themselves functions of state action given the state's role in
perpetuating racialized concentrated poverty, which is in turn correlated with
crime. A policy choice that reinforces rather than dissipates the force of
[*2443]  that pernicious generalization is hardly entitled to deference based on
its putative accuracy. n219

   A legal remedy might not be able to capture all of the diverse causal
pathways I have identified here. But a legal remedy should nonetheless respond
in part to SQF's distinctive moral wrong by identifying those instances of
policing choice that have the least positive effect on security with the largest
stratification-related spillovers. It is this question of the aptitude of
constitutional doctrine and its subconstitutional counterpart in
disparate-impact law to which I now turn.

   II. STREET POLICING AND THE LIMITS OF CONSTITUTIONAL DOCTRINE

 This Part turns to the core doctrines of constitutional law invoked and applied
in challenges to SQF - the Fourth Amendment doctrine associated with Terry and
the Equal Protection Clause rules that have coalesced around Feeney. I argue
that there is a mismatch between these doctrinal vehicles and the core normative
challenge posed by SQF as I have articulated it in Part I. This mismatch renders
current constitutional law ill-suited to accounting for the normative challenges
of SQF.

   Thinking about the costs and benefits of SQF in terms of Fourth Amendment and
Equal Protection law instead reveals a troublingly asymmetrical gap cutting
across both doctrinal structures. To wit, Fourth Amendment law and Equal
Protection law alike employ narrow transactional frames to tally the costs
imposed by state action to traditionally subordinate minorities, but are
periodically open to dynamic and ecological effects in ways that serve to
obscure or exculpate harms to racial minorities.

   To see the mismatch between current constitutional doctrine and SQF programs
in a nutshell, consider a simple hypothetical. Imagine a police force in which
every officer had internalized both Terry and Feeney. Each officer, in
consequence, understood that she could not make a nonconsensual street stop
without the relevant reasonable articulable suspicion of criminality, and that
she could not make that stop ""because of,'  [*2444]  not merely "in spite of'"
n220 the perceived racial identity of the individual to be stopped. What would
change in the actual practice of SQF? Would the concerns about the volume and
racial disparities in stops be assuaged?

   The short answer is probably not. Consistent with the weak Terry rule, it may
well be possible for a police force to conduct a very large volume of stops.
Consistent with Feeney, those stops might be constitutionally valid even if they
were distributed in a way that deepens racial stratification. Indeed, racial
disparities are particularly likely to persist if police sincerely believe that
African Americans commit a disproportionate share of offenses and thus ought to
comprise a higher per-capita rate of street stops. The application of
conventional constitutional doctrine under the Fourth Amendment and the Equal
Protection Clause, therefore, is consistent with preservation of SQF at its
present volume and as characterized by current racial disparities.

   This Part first considers the Fourth Amendment law, and shows its
inadequacies. It then analyzes Equal Protection doctrine to reveal why it has
utterly failed to address the problem of street policing.

   A. The Limits of Fourth Amendment Doctrine

 The Fourth Amendment law of street stops cannot impose a meaningful constraint
upon SQF in minority neighborhoods characterized by concentrated poverty. To the
contrary, Fourth Amendment doctrine systematically lowers the cost of such stops
in comparison to others conducted outside the distinctive urban ecologies of
SQF. To the extent that the Fourth Amendment law of street policing takes
account of changing social and institutional contexts, though, it is thoroughly
asymmetrically. It accounts for such contexts only when doing so expands state
authority.

   The "reasonable articulable suspicion" predicates for a Terry stop and a
related frisk are not demanding hurdles. They focus solely on the ex-ante
evidentiary basis for a stop, and wholly ignore the manner in which a stop is
conducted. Terry, that is, takes no account of variance in the potential
dignitary and demoralization externalities imposed by aggressive or demeaning
police behavior. Moreover, the Court has not defined "reasonable articulable
suspicion" beyond warning that an officer  [*2445]  must be able to articulate
something more than a "hunch[]." n221 The Court has instead underscored that
this evaluation be made under the "totality of the circumstances." n222 This
gives officers a wide array of predicate facts to choose from when making their
case. With one exception, officers' subjective beliefs and knowledge are as a
result available as bases for a Terry stop, n223 even though such subjective
factors are not relevant to the Fourth Amendment analysis in other contexts.
n224 The exception is also telling: even where race is the real (i.e.,
subjective) basis of the stop, the Fourth Amendment provides no remedy where
alternative factual grounds for reasonable articulable suspicion can be
conjured. n225

   Quite apart from this peculiar gerrymandering of the legally relevant grounds
for evaluating the quality of a stop, officers' discretion is rarely in practice
subject to rigorous adversarial testing in a subsequent criminal adjudication.
Where the sole witnesses to a stop are the suspect and arresting officers, there
is little reason to think the resulting testimonial contest will result in
accurate outcomes. Police have a strong incentive to color the facts in their
favor, or even outright lie. n226 A recent ethnographic account of the Chicago
criminal courts, for example, paints a bleak picture of judges who routinely
"laughed at the fabrication of police reports as if it were a novelty, rather
than an abuse of power." n227

    [*2446]  Chicago's pathologies might be extreme, but it is hard to imagine
such practices are wholly absent from other large metropolitan court systems.
n228 In many urban jurisdictions, therefore, there will be little effectual
incentive for officers to comply with Terry's meager epistemic exhortation.

   Nevertheless, the general trend in judicial reworkings of Terry has been
deflationary. I will just give one example, as it happens one that is
particularly relevant to SQF. Whereas the Terry Court allowed the stop and frisk
only when an officer suspected crime was "afoot," n229 subsequent cases extended
that power to instances in which a crime has been completed. n230

   While at first blush it might seem innocuous and sensible, this subtle shift
in practice dramatically expands police discretion. Under Terry, the
constellation of facts that might be invoked to justify a stop was bounded by
what an officer could observe at a specific moment in time. n231 Now, an officer
can rely on a far greater universe of historical facts, available through a
police forces' index of suspect descriptions, to support reasonable articulable
suspicion.

   In a handful of controversial cases, descriptions identifying
African-American suspects have been employed to conduct blanket searches. n232
In the controversial case of Brown v. City of Oneonta, for example, a
description of a black male suspect provoked Oneonta police to stop more than
two hundred "non-  [*2447]  white persons," including women, encountered on the
streets. n233 Even absent the broad search at issue in Brown, a large enough
pool of suspect descriptions (as is likely to be the case in large cities) means
that police discretion to stop becomes orders of magnitude larger than the
authority defined in Terry. n234

   Subsequent refinements to the Terry regime have rendered SQF more attractive
relative to other ways of deploying policing resources. As the late William
Stuntz noted, criminal procedure rules can act as "subsidies ... making some
kinds of ... law enforcement ... cheaper" than others. n235 Stuntz applied this
logic to make a comparison between "policing street markets," which is "cheap,"
for the police, and the more expensive regulation of indoor, upscale drug
markets. n236 His point, though, can be extended to the neighborhood level.

   For a parallel differential arises between neighborhoods of concentrated
poverty and areas of comparative wealth because of two Fourth Amendment
precedents. First, the Court in Illinois v. Wardlow held that a suspect's mere
presence in a "high crime area," and more particularly "an area of heavy
narcotics trafficking" was "relevant" to the legality of a Terry stop. n237
Evidence from New York's SQF practice also demonstrates that this term is
"vulnerable to subjective and highly contextualized interpretation." n238

   This may be of particular concern to the extent that an increasing proportion
of minorities tends to create a belief of disorderliness  [*2448]  and
criminality, as multiple studies show, n239 Wardlow creates an incentive to
target minority neighborhoods. Indeed, even setting aside the question of how a
"high crime area" is to be identified or bounded, Wardlow explicitly subsidizes
police activity in neighborhoods of concentrated poverty in comparison to
wealthy neighborhoods. n240

   Second, the Supreme Court's recent decision in Utah v. Streiff n241 creates
an incentive for officers to target for stops populations that are likely to
have a higher per capita rate of bench warrants. In Streiff, the arresting
officer was conducting a stakeout of a house where drug sales were suspected to
happen. n242 He saw Strieff leave the house and stopped him, despite lacking the
Terry predicate of reasonable articulable suspicion. n243 As a result of what
the state conceded to be an illegal stop, the officer asked Streiff for
identification. n244 Upon checking the produced documentation with his
dispatcher, the officer learned of an outstanding warrant for Streiff and
arrested him. n245 A search incident to arrest found methamphetamine and drug
paraphernalia. n246

   The issue before the Court was whether this evidence should be excluded as
fruit of the initial illegal stop. n247 Writing for five Justices, Justice
Thomas said no. n248 Characterizing the initial unlawful stop as "negligent" and
a "good-faith" mistake, n249 the Court found the search-incident-to-arrest that
had produced the narcotics to be "sufficiently attenuated by the pre-existing
arrest warrant." n250 Hence, the evidence found during the search incident to
arrest was not subject to exclusion in Streiff's criminal adjudication. n251

   As Justice Sotomayor's dissent pointed out, "Outstanding warrants are
surprisingly common." n252 A recent ethnography of  [*2449]  misdemeanor courts
in New York illustrates how courts and prosecutors generate a large volume of
outstanding warrants for failures to appear at repeatedly rescheduled hearings,
and then seek dispositions with little effect other than to facilitate later
arrests. n253

   In Streiff, Justice Sotomayor did not contextualize the use of outstanding
warrants in the SQF context. But she cited evidence gathered by the Justice
Department in Ferguson, Missouri, and explained that the "astounding numbers of
warrants can be used by police to stop people without cause," and flagged that
"it is no secret that people of color are disproportionate victims of this type
of scrutiny." n254 Justice Sotomayor's analysis is hard to dispute. Police,
indeed, have long been cognizant of the strategic potential for
outstanding-warrant checks during street stops and have strategically exploited
it. n255

   The decision in Streiff creates a new incentive for police to engage in
"negligent" stops, n256 lacking even with the minimal accouterments of
reasonable articulable suspicion, in order to check for warrants. This incentive
becomes more powerful as the expected number of such outstanding warrants in a
neighborhood increases. n257 Here then is yet another incentive pressing police
to focus street patrols on neighborhoods of concentrated poverty: even if they
cannot muster the minimal evidentiary predicate of Terry, officers have a
sure-fire way of showing "progress," simply by making illegal stops and
arresting based on either outstanding warrants or contraband found during a
search incident to arrest. Streiff allows officers to employ  [*2450]  stops
even absent Terry suspicion and demonstrate "success."

   Decisions such as Wardlow and Streiff mean that current Fourth Amendment
jurisprudence systematically tilts in favor of SQF. The doctrinal framework at
work in these cases minimizes both proximate and distant harms to individuals
stopped. It also ignores the ecological harms and dynamic stratification effects
associated with SQF. n258 Indeed, it seems fair to say that the vocabulary of
the Fourth Amendment does not at present contain the resources even to account
for those harms, let alone hold them in the balance with Terry stops' positive,
crime-control effects.

   One indication of this is that Justice Sotomayor's comments about the
ecological context of street policing were so strikingly at odds with the
normative verbiage of the Court's Fourth Amendment cases that they generated
national media attention. n259 If the mere fact a Justice is cognizant of the
larger policy context in which a legal question arises stimulates the press into
action, it is because the modal Fourth Amendment decision is hermetically
detached from the distinctive ecological and dynamic costs flowing from urban
policing.

   Nevertheless, that jurisprudence is not wholly bounded by a narrow,
transactional focus. Rather, the Court selectively and asymmetrically accounts
for dynamic effects. Consider the Streiff Court's treatment of the exclusionary
remedy. n260 The Court's foundational decisions about the scope of that remedy
focus on its effects on officers' incentives. n261 The Court has repeatedly
stressed that it is willing to allow the costly exclusionary remedy only when
its downstream incentive effects in relation to police compliance with the
Fourth Amendment are substantial. n262 Notionally acknowledging this point, the
Streiff  [*2451]  Court stated that only "purposeful or flagrant" police
misconduct needed to be deterred by exclusion. n263

   But why this would be so is not clear. Tort liability for negligence, for
example, can easily be premised on a deterrence theory. n264 In Streiff itself,
the Court gave no thought to the possibility that its rule might elicit less
care by officers in their use of Terry stops - let alone a differential impact
in neighborhoods characterized by high rates of outstanding or bench warrants.

   Streiff suggests that the Court is willing to think about the dynamic effects
of the exclusionary rule on incentives when doing so narrows Fourth Amendment
remedies, but it is not willing to entertain a dynamic analysis when doing so
would expand those remedies. n265 In other cases, the Justices have similarly
been willing to account for increases in police professionalism. n266 Yet
judicial decisions on the exclusionary rule systematically ignore potential
institutional problems of police perjury and abusive conduct. n267

   There is, in short, little reason to expect that the Court's current Fourth
Amendment doctrine will provide a vehicle for capturing the distinctive wrong of
SQF. Indeed to the extent it nudges police conduct of urban street policing in
one way or another, the Court has abetted the core wrong of SQF more than it has
ameliorated it. For this reason, it seems wise to also analyze SQF in terms of
its racial impact - a topic addressed at length below and in Part III.

[*2452]

   B. The Limits of Equal Protection Doctrine

 The Supreme Court's decisions on race and the Equal Protection Clause provide
no better traction on the distinctive wrong of SQF. To the contrary, thinking
about racial equality doctrine through the lens of SQF illuminates a gap between
the Court's articulated justifications and its current doctrinal specifications.
To take seriously the normative concerns I have flagged would mean treating SQF
as a paradigmatic Equal Protection violation. Today, however, the doctrine
relegates policing disparities to the margin.

   Two core prohibitions are embodied in current Equal Protection Clause
jurisprudence. First, explicit racial classifications trigger strict scrutiny,
and require government to "demonstrate with clarity" that its "purpose or
interest is both constitutionally permissible and substantial, and that its use
of the classification is necessary ... to the accomplishment of its purpose."
n268

   In the absence of an explicit racial classification, n269 a government action
motivated by a "discriminatory purpose" with an adverse effect on a discrete
protected class establishes an Equal Protection Clause violation. But the
Court's gloss on discriminatory purpose, promulgated in Personnel Administrator
of Massachusetts v. Feeney, is cast in exacting terms. n270 It compels litigants
to show that a state actor "selected or reaffirmed a particular course of action
at least in part "because of,' not merely "in spite of,' its adverse effects
upon an identifiable group." n271 In contrast, a disparate impact on a racial
group alone does nothing to impugn the constitutionality of a state action. n272

    [*2453]  In the criminal justice context, this doctrinal framework leaves
the state with a largely free hand. At the Supreme Court, few Equal Protection
cases have arisen in the criminal justice context concerning systemic or
structural inequalities, as opposed to discrete instances of bias on the part of
individual actors such as jurors or (more rarely) prosecutors.

   Only one recent case has grappled with an explicit racial classification. In
Johnson v. California, a state prison used a racial classification to sort
inmates temporarily before cell assignments could be determined. n273 The Court
rejected the state's call to derogate from strict scrutiny. n274 In contrast,
the Court declined to grant certiorari in Brown v. City of Oneonta, a case that
would have required it to consider whether the Second Circuit had correctly held
that a race-based suspect description was not a "racial classification" subject
to strict scrutiny. n275

   Under Feeney, there are a handful of cases in which prosecutorial use of
preemptory challenges is held to be racially motivated, and thus to violate the
Equal Protection Clause. n276 But more systemic challenges to the operation of
the criminal justice institutions have been wholly absent from the Court's
docket since the 1987 case of McClesky v. Kemp. n277 In large measure, this is
because McCleskey established a near-insurmountable barrier to such challenges.
n278 In that capital  [*2454]  case, the Court declined to infer discriminatory
purpose from unrebutted statistical evidence that Georgia's capital punishment
treated defendants differently based on their race and the race of their victim.
n279 Among the reasons the Court offered for declining to entertain even
powerful statistical evidence, n280 it worried that "if we accepted McCleskey's
claim that racial bias has impermissibly tainted the capital sentencing
decision, we could soon be faced with similar claims as to other types of
penalty," including noncapital sentencing. n281 This concern about what Justice
Brennan acerbically characterized as "a fear of too much justice" n282 reoccurs
in other instances in which criminal justice disparities have been challenged.
n283

   Absent the miraculous happenstance of testimonial or documentary evidence of
bias - a stroke of luck that befell plaintiffs in the challenge to New York's
SQF policy n284 - McCleskey  [*2455]  means that the courthouse door is
effectively shut to discriminatory-purpose challenges in the criminal justice
context. n285 McCleskey, in tandem with the narrow definition of "racial
classifications" evinced by the Court's treatment of Johnson and Brown,
drastically narrows litigants' opportunities to challenge the role of race in
criminal justice institutions.

   The substance of current Equal Protection doctrine, in short, evinces no
concern for either the ecological spillovers of enforcement actions onto larger
racial cohorts. And much like the Fourth Amendment cases canvassed above, it is
heedless of dynamic effects - except perhaps for its evident concern with
maintaining the criminal-justice status quo. Finally, neither the rule against
racial classification nor the bar to discriminatory motivations takes into
account the possibility that officials are aware that a policy pursued for
nonracial ends has a wholly foreseeable negative effects on other members of a
racial or ethnic cohort, n286 or the possibility that race is so pervasively
correlated with nonracial traits - such as residence, socioeconomic status, and
the like - that official decision-makers simply cannot disentangle racial from
nonracial criteria. n287

   There is something of a puzzle here. In glossing the Equal Protection Clause,
the Court has invoked ideas of racial stigma, n288 racial balkanization, n289
and the dignitary interest in being judged on one's own merits. n290 And then it
has been largely silent about policing.

    [*2456]  But it is not hard to see that SQF, as described in Part I,
implicates each of these concerns. It is, most importantly, often expressly
predicated on a putative relationship between race to criminality. n291 It is
indeed explicitly defended on the basis of a generalization - a stereotype about
racial minorities that is not merely derogatory, but that has historically been
a keystone of discriminatory legal architectures. And its advocates make no
bones that the price of public safety will be borne disproportionately by only
some, and only because of the color of their skin.

   Further, it not only thrives upon the festering racial segregation that scars
our cities, but it reinforces segregation to the extent that minorities are
subject to increased stops when they leave their neighborhoods. Quite literally,
it echoes and embeds the balkanization of our cities into black and white
quarters.

   In addition, thanks to the weak evidentiary threshold of Terry, it enables
police to engage in aggregate deprivations of individual liberty that are
predicated only fractionally on individual behavior and largely on race and
place. If one takes the Court's justifications on face value, policing tactics
such as SQF, in short, ought to be the sine qua non of what the Equal Protection
Clause prevents.

   The Equal Protection doctrine, in conclusion, provides the moral
justifications but not the doctrinal tools for dealing with SQF. It is beholden
to the default narrow and atomistic transactional frame of constitutional
doctrine, which shears away both ecological and dynamic contexts. And
ultimately, it lacks the courage of its notional convictions. For these reasons,
it is not well adapted to the task of fixing SQF.

   III. THE DISPARATE-IMPACT LENS ON SQF

 This Part turns from critique to a more constructive proposal. Not all
instruments to mitigate moral wrongs have to reside in the Constitution. So I
look elsewhere.

   I argue that a disparate-impact framework of liability, now found in both
federal statutes and state law, provides a better - but  [*2457]  not a perfect
- framework for analyzing urban street-policing policy.

   The purpose of the disparate-impact lens advanced here is diagnostic. It is
also second best in the sense that it does not track the loose cost-benefit
analysis that is fleshed out in Part I: that cost-benefit analysis, in my view,
impugns all programmatic use of SQF in racially diverse cities at present. More
modestly, a disparate-impact lens provides a way to identify when a police
department's programmatic use of Terry stops is especially likely to be
unjustified because it is characterized by distinctive ecological and dynamic
harms. A disparate-impact lens, in other words, flushes out the subset of
municipal policing practices from which the harms identified in Part I are most
likely to flow. It does not flag every instance in which SQF is unjustified on
welfarist terms.

   Formally, a disparate-impact framework identifies a set of policing practices
in which the likely proximate costs of SQF are concentrated on minority
communities without an adequately supported justification. The analysis
developed in Part II suggested that the proximate costs of SQF - which include
the hassle and humiliation of stops - are only a fraction of the total costs of
SQF. The latter comprise the larger set of dynamic costs to individuals,
families and communities.

   But if even the proximate costs of SQF are highly concentrated, it is likely
that aggregate costs are also extremely concentrated. Where the state cannot
identify a strong public policy justification for that concentration, SQF should
be ranked as legally problematic. More specifically, where the state cannot
adequately make the case that the concentration of SQF responds to a real crime
problem, and in fact mitigates that problem, it should be required to reconsider
its policing strategy.

   In this sense, the avoidance of disparate impact is a modest, second-best
demand, which nudges the state's attention toward the right elements of policing
strategy. n292 It invites, that is, remedial attention to systemic, rather than
individualistic, pathologies. And it avoids the moralizing, and potentially
polarizing, language of individual blame and liability.

   To flesh out this alternative lens onto SQF, this Part defines and defends
disparate-impact liability as a legally available approach for analyzing
policing decisions. In particular, I  [*2458]  develop the reasons for which
disparate impact is superior to the currently dominant constitutional approaches
described in Part II. Having dealt with potential objections to its translation
to the policing context, I conclude by sketching how in practice
disparate-impact liability can be applied to SQF.

   In practice, a disparate-impact analysis requires econometric studies of the
aggregate data about stops, frisks, and other outcomes, as well as fine-grained
judgments about how to specify and interpret such studies. I set forth three
general lines of inquiry that might profitably be applied to such aggregate data
to determine whether a disparate impact exists; I largely bracket, however, more
technical questions of econometric specification. Together, these empirical
strategies nevertheless provide a rough template for making disparate impact an
effective and practicable instrument of legal reform.

   A. The Availability of Disparate Impact

 The theory of disparate-impact liability in race discrimination cases is
associated with the Supreme Court's construction of Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 in Griggs v. Duke Power Co. n293 In a somewhat chastened
form, it remains available to plaintiffs in employment discrimination cases.
n294 Disparate impact is also a cognizable theory of liability under the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) n295 and the Fair Housing Act (FHA).
n296 It can be understood as either an instrument for rooting out bad intent, or
as a freestanding ground of liability. n297 Disparate impact is in contrast, a
"road not taken' in Equal Protection law. n298

   Disparate-impact liability in the policing context is available under two
sets of laws. First, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits
"discrimination under any program or activety"  [*2459]  receiving federal
funds. n299 Pursuant to an explicit grant of rule-making authority under the
statute, federal agencies, including the Department of Justice, have promulgated
regulations prohibiting disparate racial impacts as well as disparate racial
treatment. n300 The Justice Department's disparate-impact regulation applies to
"any program for which Federal financial assistance is authorized under a law
administered by the Department." n301 Because local police departments receive
federal funding from "dozens" of separate programs, many administered by the
Department of Justice, n302 the Title VI bar on disparate impact applies to most
state and local police forces. That prohibition, however, may be enforced by
public suits but not via individuals invoking a private right of action. n303
The New Orleans consent decree and the Baltimore settlement obtained by the
Justice Department, for example, both invoke Title VI authority, albeit in
nebulous terms. n304

   Second, at least two states prohibit policing measures with disparate racial
impacts. The Illinois Civil Rights Act, tracking Title VI's language and effect,
prohibits "discrimination under any program or activity on the grounds of that
person's race, color, national origin, or gender." n305 In at least one case, it
has been applied to policing decisions. n306 California's law, which applies to
all state programs, prohibits "criteria or methods of administration that ...
have the purpose or effect of subjecting  [*2460]  a person to discrimination on
the basis of ethnic group identification, religion, age, sex, color, or a
physical or mental disability." n307

   Disparate impact is commonly framed as a three-step analysis. In the
employment-discrimination context, a prima facie case is established by showing
that a specific employment practice caused racial disparities in a salient
outcome measure. n308 A racial disparity is gauged by comparing employment rates
in an employer's workforce with the qualified labor pool n309 or the applicant
pool, n310 rather than to the general population. Agencies interpreting Title
VII have long used a four-fifth rule to single out cognizable disparities. n311
The Supreme Court has approvingly cited this interpretation, adding that a
simple "significant statistical disparity, and nothing more" is needed at the
threshold. n312

   This prima facie case, however, may be rebutted by evidence that "the
challenged practice is job related for the position in question and consistent
with business necessity." n313 This  [*2461]  defense, however, is overcome if
there is a legitimate alternative employment practice that will result in less
discrimination. n314

   B. The Comparative Advantage of Disparate Impact

 Black-letter constitutional law largely ignores the ecological and dynamic
aspects of SQF. It therefore fails to provide a useful analytic lens for
determining when and how urban street policing is a moral wrong.

   Why would a disparate-impact lens do any better? It is not a form of
cost-benefit analysis of the kind developed above, after all. Rather, a
disparate-impact analysis is appropriate here because it is a way to isolate the
proximate costs of a policy (excluding, that is, its social, familial, and
intergenerational effects) and to compare those to its affirmative policy
justifications. In the policing context, disparate impact thus weighs a
subcategory of the costs imposed on minority populations against almost all the
crime-control related benefits of the policy. Given its failure to capture the
full range of costs adumbrated in Part II, and given that it will likely account
for most of the benefits of SQF, a disparate-impact lens is likely to be
radically under-inclusive: it will only capture a subset of cases in which SQF
imposes a moral wrong.

   Nevertheless, there are three reasons for thinking that disparate impact is a
better fit for identifying the distinctive moral wrong of SQF identified in Part
I even if it does not track precisely a cost-benefit analysis.

   First, disparate-impact liability is at least focused on aggregate, rather
than individual, outcomes. It is panoramic rather than microscopic. The
institutional focus of disparate impact widens the array of relevant
institutional decisions that can be considered as causes of harm. Policing is
not simply a matter of officers on the street, making ad hoc decisions. Like any
other complex organizations, a police force is channeled through policies,
practices, and bureaucratic norms developed at competing institutional nodes,
from city hall to chief of police's office to the precinct-house. The capacious
lens used by disparate impact captures more relevant state actions than an
approach focused on bad motives.

   Analysis under a wide-angle disparate-impact rubric is also not limited to
the consequences of a discrete individual's action.  [*2462]  It focuses more
capaciously on all "the effects of [a] ... practice." n315 SQF, as I have
described it in Part I, need not rest on pernicious individual motivations to
generate a distinctive moral wrong. Rather, that wrong can flow from the
"effects" of institutional policies and practices. Disparate impact is sensitive
to a wide range of effects, and is in particular able to capture the interaction
between past distributions and present policing practice. An institutional
practice, such as SQF, will produce different effects depending on the context
to which is applied. When employed in a fashion that tracks patterns of existing
racial segregation, its race-related patterns will be different from an
application that cuts across extant forms of racial stratification. This
difference is captured in the broad scope of disparate-impact analysis, which
accounts for history, as well as institutional context, in a way that
discriminatory treatment analysis cannot.

   Second, disparate-impact analysis focuses attention on the morally relevant
question of whether the crime-control benefits of the policy as a whole justify
its costs. Once a racial effect is identified at the threshold, the second step
of the disparate-impact analysis involves careful consideration of the
affirmative justifications for the disparity. In effect, the analysis roughly
weighs positives against negatives.

   In the discriminatory treatment context, by contrast, there is no opportunity
to identify or weigh all relevant costs. As a result, when a race-based criteria
is used, as in Brown v. City of Oneonta, n316 a Court inclined to permit
race-based suspect descriptions as cost-justified will find it easier to avoid
strict scrutiny by declining to perceive a racial classification at work in the
first instance. n317 On the other side of the ledger, disparate-impact analysis
also considers the aggregate outcomes of a policy. In the SQF context, for
example, this would mean counts of the numbers of different racial groups who
are stopped.

   Again, it is important to emphasize that this is not a full tally of the
ecological and dynamic spillovers from aggressive  [*2463]  SQF policing. But it
accounts for the policy's sheer size - and hence reflects, at least
approximately, the effect of a large number of minority stops on self-worth,
residential patterns, and the diffusion of stereotypical beliefs about the links
between race and crime far better than a legal framework pinched to fit cleanly
around individual motives.

   Finally, disparate-impact liability obviates the need to make controversial
judgments about individuals' intentions, beliefs, and attitudes. By focusing
attention on these elusive psychological facts, both Terry and Feeney invite
self-deception and perjury on the part of police and municipal policymakers. The
Feeney framework in particular also ratchets up emotional stakes by predicating
a remedy on the finding that a specific person is motivated by discriminatory
intent, a standard that has the potential to induce backlash within regulated
entities such as police forces. n318 By honing in upon consequentialist criteria
instead, the disparate-impact standard obviates loaded, and easily deflected,
allegations of bad intent, even as it draws salutary attention to the deeper and
more enduring costs of SQF.

   To be clear, no judicially enforceable theory of liability will provide a
panacea to the problem of concentrated racialized poverty, or the complex
network of state action and inaction that created and perpetuated it. The case
for disparate-impact liability in the policing context rests on the more modest
claim that it captures a wider array of morally relevant costs and benefits than
the available alternatives. It does not imply perfection.

   C. The Objections to Disparate Impact in the Policing Context

 Three objections to the application of disparate-impact liability to the
policing context are worth resolving before turning to the nitty-gritty of
application. They concern its constitutionality, its efficacy, and the
availability of popular support.

   To begin with, there has recently been a question about the constitutionality
of disparate-impact liability, even though in its infancy in the 1970s it was
understood as an important  [*2464]  strand of Equal Protection law. n319
Paradoxically, at least one member of the Court has intimated that disparate
impact might itself violate the Equal Protection Clause because it forces race
consciousness. n320 Nevertheless, more recent precedent suggests that there is
"no constitutional problem in the existence of disparate impact prohibitions,"
but that "those prohibitions might raise such problems in their application."
n321 In particular, the Court has suggested that the second step of the analysis
- the proffer of legitimate justifications for a disparity - is key.

   In glossing the FHA's disparate impact prong, the Court in its 2015 Texas
Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project
opinion cautioned that constitutional problems would arise if "liability were
imposed based solely on a showing of a statistical disparity." n322 Rather, it
is only "artificial, arbitrary, and unnecessary barriers" that legitimately and
constitutionally trigger such liability. n323 This places great stress on the
opportunity a defendant must have in a disparate impact proceeding to point to
"[non-]arbitrary" and "[]necessary" grounds for a justification. n324 More
specifically, a regression analysis used to identify a race effect must include
controls for legitimate justifications for a disparity. n325

    [*2465]  A second concern raised by a number of recent commentators is that
"the disparate impact theory has produced no substantial social change and there
is no reason to think that extending the theory to other contexts would have
produced meaningful reform." n326 A common thread uniting these concerns is the
premise that courts are unwilling to "broadly restructure social institutions"
n327 or interfere with the private intra-firm ordering. n328

   To be sure, the frailty of the judicial will to enforce constitutional norms
on behalf of disfavored groups cannot be overstated. Nevertheless, blanket
pessimism is unwarranted for two reasons.

   To begin with, several cities are already operating under consent decrees or
settlements that either include an independent monitor or envisage much
judicially supervised reorganization of street policing. n329 Further, there is
no reason to think that municipal officials involved in the negotiation and
operationalizing of these deals lack any interest at all in mitigating the
fierce public pressure to diminish the racial tensions of urban policing. The
application of disparate-impact liability provides a more cogent way for them to
understand how to do so than available alternatives.

   In addition, precise agency regulations, such as those issued in 2015 under
the FHA, have the potential "to stabilize disparate-impact law and to provide
clarity to regulated entities subject to different judicial standards." n330
There is no reason such stabilization cannot be achieved in the policing context
through more specific Justice Department regulations  [*2466]  (however unlikely
these might be in the near term). Indeed, the more granular account of how to
think about disparate impact in the context of policing data that follows in
Part III.C itself can do double duty by providing a framework for such
regulations.

   Finally, it might be argued that broad support for aggressive street policing
within minority communities provides a sufficient justification for racially
disparate allocation of Terry stops. n331 If the very communities that suffer
the costs of intensive policing also clamor for such policing, the moral case
for disparate-impact liability seems thin indeed. Yet evidence for community
demand in the context of SQF is thin on the ground. Protests in Chicago, New
York, and Philadelphia about stop and frisk have been led by organizations from
minority communities. n332 More generally, to the extent that African-American
political leaders have sought increased policing, there have been "accompanying
demands to redirect power and economic resources to low-income minority
communities." n333 But "when blacks ask for better policing, legislators tend to
hear more instead." n334 Disparate-impact liability is more sensitive to the
marginal crime-control benefits attached to SQF, as well as its costs. It is
therefore a sensible way to reconcile minority communities' demands for both
better public security and also freedom for excessive street policing cannot.

   D. Disparate Impact in Action

 This final Section sketches how a disparate-impact analysis of SQF data might
be put into action. Its twofold aim is to show that such inquiries are feasible,
and to start to make progress  [*2467]  on some of the knotty theoretical
puzzles raised by disparate impact's implementation.

   To set the stage for this inquiry, it is useful to consider its practical
context. The settlements in Philadelphia and Chicago, which were both reached
without information-generating litigation, require ongoing collection of
extensive data concerning the timing, justifications, suspect demographics, and
consequences of stops. n335 How might this data be interrogated for evidence of
disparate impact? How concretely can one inquiry into whether a discrete
practice or policy causes a racially disparate impact that is not justified on
legitimate and necessary grounds be executed?

   In answering these questions, I focus on the theoretical questions of what
kinds of disparities should count, not more technical questions of econometric
identification strategy.

   A disparate racial impact can result from one of three elements of policing
strategy. Each of the latter warrants separate and distinct analysis. At each
level, racial disparities salient to the distinctive moral wrong of SQF can
emerge. And at each level, the state can also avail itself of different
legitimate justifications for the disparity. If anything, the feasible analytic
tools favor the state as a result. Disparate-impact analysis, in the fashion
developed here, is decisively under-inclusive insofar as it does not capture all
the ecological and dynamic externalities from SQF. The availability of plural
tests to capture a racially disparate effect only partially compensate for this
lacuna. Nevertheless, it is the best extant doctrinal framework for the problem,
and also likely superior to anything that can be created from scratch in current
political conditions.

   For the purpose of illustration here, I hypothesize a municipal jurisdiction
that has just entered a consent decree. We can assume that like New York,
Philadelphia, and Chicago, this municipality is racially and economically
segregated, with race and socioeconomic status closely covarying. We can also
assume that the city is divided into precincts, which are the foundational
elements of the geographic allocation of police. The municipality's SQF, as in
real-life cases, is directed at neighborhoods of concentrated poverty and high
crime - which are also predominantly minority. The municipality is required to
gather data about stops of the kind elicited by the Chicago and Philadelphia
[*2468]  settlements. I will assume police collect that data faithfully. n336 I
focus here on the legal question of what questions can be asked of the resulting
data.

   I discuss each three levels of analysis in turn. For each level, I identify
the relevant element of state policy or practice; the outcome across which
racial disparities may be observed; and the range of feasible justifications a
municipality might offer. Where possible, I also note if the question has been
examined in an existing study or litigation.

   1. Between-Precinct Disparities

 The first level of analysis that should be tested is the rate of SQF deployment
by precinct. Recall that the core justification for SQF tendered by its
defenders is that street police are deployed where crime occurs; racial
disparities arise only because crime is concentrated in minority neighborhoods.
n337

   But this may not be the case. Perceptions of crime can also be a function of
the racial composition of a neighborhood. n338 A threshold policy decision to be
tested is the volume of Terry stop per precinct with a lagged measure of crime
as a control. This is a way of determining whether the geographical distribution
of policing resources turns on racial demographics or crime rates. n339

   For example, Jeffrey Fagan tested whether the number of stops per precinct in
New York City was disproportionate to the racial composition of the precinct,
after controlling for several different types of historical crime rate. n340 His
analysis suggested that crime-based justification for SQF's allocation was
unfounded. n341 Using an ordinary least squares regression, he  [*2469]  found
that the percentage of African-American residents was a stronger predictor of
Terry stop volume than lagged rates of violent crime, narcotics offices, weapons
offenses and trespass. n342 Only property and quality-of-life rates outperformed
race as predictors of stop volume. n343 This is an especially striking result
given SQF's justification in the wake of the Kansas City Experiment as a means
of reducing violent crime, and as an alternative to broken windows policing.
n344

   It is also striking because the assumption that an increase in crime rates
should predict a subsequent increase in street stops is dubious insofar as it
stacks the deck in the state's favor in a normative troubling way. The use of
lagged crime rates as a control assumes that the only available, or perhaps the
best available, policing response to upticks in crime concern is more intensive
street policing.

   But this is false. n345 As I have argued, the evidence that SQF has a large
crime-control effect is weak, especially in comparison to alternative policing
instruments. n346 The use of crime rates as a baseline further assumes that
Terry stops are responsive to all species of violent crime. But at least for the
proportion of violent crimes that occur within the home against partners or
other intimates, it is hard to see how Terry stops are responsive. n347 In
short, there is no good reason to assume the best, only, or most effective
response to rising crime rates in a specific neighborhood is to increase the
number of people being stopped. n348

   A between-precinct measure of racial disparities can be combined with a range
of other measures to develop a more nuanced rendering of how policing resources
are allocated across geographic areas. Hence, simple descriptive statistics can
provide useful confirmatory evidence, even if they cannot on their  [*2470]  own
prove disparate-impact liability consistent with Inclusive Communities. n349 The
data might be further interrogated by comparing the determinants of
precinct-level deployments with the rate of stops per resident, conditional on
racial identity. n350 Where such citywide tests find that not only do minority
neighborhoods bear a disproportionate toll of stops, but minority individuals
also bear a larger share of those stops, there is reason for concern that SQF is
not only regressive in effect, but also triggers the dynamic, vicious-circle
processes described in Part I.C.

   In addition, the between-precinct distribution of street policing is usefully
contrasted with the distribution of other policing resources. If precincts that
receive intensive Terry treatments, for example, are associated with lower rates
of other policing measures - e.g., they have fewer officers deployed across both
reactive and proactive policing, or they have persistently longer wait times for
911 calls - then there is further reason for skepticism that crime control
simpliciter in fact explains or justifies racial disparities in stops across
geographic subunits within the municipality.

   2. Within-Precinct Disparities

 The next level of analysis focuses on the distribution of Terry stops by racial
or ethnic group within a precinct. Between-precinct tests are incomplete because
even if there are no between-precinct disparities, a disparate racial impact
might emerge within a given precinct if racial minorities engaged in the same
(potentially criminal) conduct as non-minorities are more likely, holding all
else constant, to be stopped or otherwise policed than non-minorities in the
same position.

   The intuition that racial minorities may be overpoliced in comparison to
similar non-minority citizens is easy to see in the context of racially
heterogeneous, central business districts, where minority citizens may be
perceived as categorically out of  [*2471]  place and hence suspicious. But the
same disparity can arise even in poorer, majority-minority neighborhoods.

   A pair of studies of narcotics policing in Seattle by Katherine Beckett and
her colleagues nicely illustrate how race might figure in within-precinct
dynamics in this way. Their first study demonstrated (among other things) that
in the Capitol Hill neighborhood of Seattle, three percent of those purchasing
narcotics were African American, while 20.5% of those arrested were African
American. n351

   Their second study found that predominantly white outdoor drug markets
received "far less attention" from police than racially diverse ones, such that
the "geographic concentration of law enforcement resources [was] a significant
cause of racial disparity." n352 Indeed, a qualitative component of the study
found that police officers flagged one racially diverse crack market while
failing to mention a similar but "overwhelmingly white" market for prescription
drugs operating alongside it. n353

   Of special note here, Beckett and her collaborators explicitly consider the
possibility that differences in the policing of crack cocaine and prescription
drug markets may have been due to different levels of associated violence. n354
They find, however, that the association between crack and violence "does not
appear to have existed in Seattle during the period under investigation." n355

   These studies' findings echo sociological findings of how racial composition
often predicts perceptions of crime, and historical findings about the deep
roots of stereotypes of black criminality. They demonstrate the importance of a
nuanced and contextualized analysis of what is happening within heavily policed
neighborhoods, rather than a blase assumption that heavy policing in high-crime
neighborhoods is necessarily even-handed or efficacious.

   A within-precinct analysis usefully considers whether the rate of minority
stops is better predicted by legitimate policing grounds or suspects' race,
conditional on certain precinct level characteristics. Within a pool of
stop-related data, the number of stops per ethnic group within a given time
period would be  [*2472]  the outcome (i.e., dependent) variable to be
explained. n356 For a given precinct, one could ask whether there is a
statistically significant correlation between the rate of stops and the fact
individual suspects are African American or Hispanic rather than white, after
controlling for relevant precinct-level characteristics. Some existing studies
deploy a method called multilevel modeling to control simultaneously for
individual and precinct-level factors. n357 I will assume that approach is
valid, although nothing rests on that assumption so long as some parallel
econometric technique is available.

   The pivotal question for such multilevel models is the choice of control
variables to capture "[non-]arbitrary" and "[]necessary" justifications. n358 A
disparate-impact model should include only control variables that provide
normatively valid justifications for a within-precinct racial disparity.

   In this regard, it is fundamentally dissimilar from tests for discriminatory
motives. A regression-based test for the latter operates by excluding all
possible explanations for a stop except for the race of a suspect. The study
employed in the New York litigation, for example, controls for the foreign-born
proportion of a precinct, socioeconomic status, and the presence of a business
district. n359 But a racial disparate impact, as a matter of law, arises not
only when there is no other possible explanation for a racial gap in stop rates.
It additionally arises when there is no legitimate explanation related to
policing goals for that gap.

   In this regard, the economic analysis of disparate impacts is unlike the
large array of econometric studies that focus on a "causal if-then question" and
treat randomized trials as an "ideal." n360 Variables such as the socioeconomic
character of a  [*2473]  precinct, its foreign-born populace, and officer race
have no place in disparate-impact analysis. n361 Their inclusion leads to
"included variable bias" insofar as they "would not plausibly justify a racial
disparity in outcomes." n362 Even when included in disparate treatment analyses,
they result in "bloated statistical models so chock-full of covariates (i.e.,
control variables) that any evidence of disparate treatment disappears." n363

   In several existing studies, lagged crime or violent crime rates are used as
the baseline control in this sort of multilevel model. n364 This parameter at
least relates directly to the notional justification that a municipality has for
increased street stops - i.e., crime-related patterns - subject to the concerns
raised above. n365 It captures the ways in which deployment levels might
fluctuate in response to shifts in the geographic distribution of crime.

   It is also likely to be superior to a benchmark of lagged arrest rates, which
is employed in some models. n366 The latter are potentially influenced by
officers' racial beliefs. To this end, a recent metastudy of the effect of
suspect race on arrest decisions found that minorities are at least thirty
percent more likely to be arrested as similar non-minority suspects. n367
Historical arrest rates thus provide a distorted baseline, which obscures
potential racial disparities in stops by implicitly controlling for officer
bias.

   It is worth underscoring once more that the racial composition of the pool of
those suspected of a crime, or arrested for a crime is by no means an
unproblematic benchmark for the racial composition of those subject to a Terry
stop even within a particular neighborhood. The best argument from using such
[*2474]  data as a benchmark, in my view, focuses solely on racial composition
of the local violent offender population. It hypothesizes that police focus
either on people or places associated with higher violent crime risk. Given
racial segregation and racial divides between social groups, it is then
predicted that the racial composition of the stopped population will track that
of the at-risk population.

   Setting aside questions about the efficacy of SQF generally as a
crime-control measure, there are nonetheless three reasons for skepticism of
even this benchmark. First, this logic assumes that municipalities can
accurately zero in on not just places but persons who present a risk of
violence. It is not clear that this is so. For example, a recent study of
Chicago's "Strategic Subjects" List, which was used in this fashion, found that
individuals on the city's list were no more or less likely to be victimized by
violence than a control group. n368

   Second, if SQF focuses on places rather than persons, the number of
individuals involved in violent crime is still a small fraction of the volume of
people stopped. n369 In the exceptionally bloody month of August 2016 in
Chicago, for example, ninety people were killed by gunfire. n370 The number of
stops that month was likely at least two orders of magnitude greater. Even
assuming that the Chicago police in that month were focused accurately on
corners where violence was likely to occur, more than one hundred instances of
reasonable articulable suspicion were being targeted for every one act of
violence. And even if police then have reason to anticipate a particular corner
or street will witness violence, at a minimum some ninety-nine out of every one
hundred stops will have no relation to that violence. Historical patterns of
violence cannot explain why reasonable articulable suspicion existed for those
individuals. The racial demographics of violent crimes or violent crime-related
[*2475]  arrests on a given street or corner do not necessarily predict the
racial distribution of reasonable articulable suspicion that police can witness
at any given moment in time. For most stops, most of the time, therefore, it
seems likely that historical crime rates will be orthogonal to the incidence of
a Terry stop.

   Finally, imagine a municipality that affirmatively directs its police to
engage in a pattern of stops that mimics the racial distribution of violent
crime offenders. In many contexts, that distribution will skew heavily towards
African Americans (and to a lesser extent Hispanics). This is, in effect a
system of racial quotas where some large fraction of those subject to state
coercion suffer that fate based solely on their race rather than their own past
conduct. Especially given the weak empirical support for SQF's efficacy, such a
policy raises stark Equal Protection concerns even under the Supreme Court's
current highly restrictive view of the doctrine. n371

   Instead of using crime rates, violent crime rates, or analogous arrest rates
as a benchmark of just policing, therefore, a study of disparate impact would
ideally track Beckett and colleagues' Seattle study in estimating the racial
composition of the baseline population subject to police action through
ethnographic observation (of open-air drug markets) and other means. n372
Ideally, that is, data would be sampled, perhaps from police body-cameras, to
estimate the racial composition of the population observed on patrol for whom
reasonable articulable suspicion obtained.

   If, like police in Beckett's studies, officers tended to ignore non-minority
offenders while stopping minority offenders, a within-precinct disparity would
be established with certainty. Such an approach is hardly impossible. Indeed, a
recent study of Oakland policing used text analysis of sound recordings from
officers' body-cameras to identify differential racial treatment of citizens
during street encounters. n373

   3. Within-and Between-Officer Disparities

 Finally, racial disparities can emerge not only at the aggregate levels of
between-and within-precincts. n374 They can also  [*2476]  arise either because
some (or all) officers within a precinct differentiate between minority and
non-minority suspects without a legitimate justification. This level of police
action - which comprises the dispersed exercise of individual officers'
discretion - demands attention to the specific sequence of distinct police
actions embedded within a particular interaction, ranging from the decision to
stop, the decision to frisk, the use of force, and the imposition of subsequent
consequences such as citations or arrests. Given the existence of outstanding
warrants as a reason for arrests, however, the latter are a particularly tricky
variable to analyze because they may be unrelated to the initial stop.

   I sketch here the most promising approaches for identifying racial
disparities at the individual officer level. I then caution against the use of
the most popular economic model of police stops, commonly known as the KPT
model, as neither apposite nor realistic as a framework for analyzing SQF.

   Individual officers might create racially disparate effects in two distinct
ways. First, the Terry standard of reasonable articulable suspicion is a vague
term with a range of possible calibrations. n375 Some or all officers might
apply stronger or weaker evidentiary predicates for stops of different racial
groups. Second, as Fryer's powerful analysis of New York policing demonstrates,
officers might differentially treat minorities who have been stopped by
employing a greater quantum of violence. Other outcomes, such as citations and
arrests, might also be disparately allocated. Disparities in both stop rates and
post-stop outcomes should be analyzed in a disparate-impact analysis.

   On the stop-rate question, a simple measure is to rerun the multilevel models
used for within-precinct disparities using officers rather than precincts as the
relevant unit of analysis and lagged crime rates (measured at the smallest
available geographic unit) as a control. n376 A parallel analysis can be run for
outcomes, such as the seizure of contraband or firearms. n377 Again, included
variable bias would result if controls other than legitimate policing
justification (such as the lagged-crime-rate measure) were included.

    [*2477]  Alternatively, a more promising approach involves the use of the
"stop-level hit rate" (SHR) or the ex-ante probability of discovering contraband
or a weapon based on what an officer knows before a stop. n378 Focusing on
weapons-related stops, Sharad Goel and his colleagues first use two years' worth
of historical stop forms to calculate the actual probability of finding a weapon
for various combinations of factors listed on stop forms as the basis of
"reasonable articulable suspicion" (along with location, timing, and local
hit-rate data). n379 This enables them to calculate the distribution of ex-ante
probabilities of finding weapons for minorities and non-minorities, both in
general and holding location constant. n380 In effect, by comparing the
distribution of SHRs for blacks and whites, they show that the effective quantum
of reasonable articulable suspicion for minorities is lower than that for
non-minorities. n381 The same analysis might be executed by precinct or by
officer to determine if racial disparities are either geographically
concentrated or the work of a small fraction of officers.

   Rather than following Goel's lead, the economics literature is dominated by a
model by John Knowles, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd known as the KPT model.
n382 In capsule form, KPT is a game-theoretical model of traffic stops in which
police seek to maximize arrests and both black and white motorists maximize
contraband. Police observe race. Both they and motorists strategically
anticipate the other's actions. KPT predicts a Nash equilibrium in which blacks
and whites are stopped at different rates, while the probability of finding
contraband (i.e., the hit rate) across groups is equal. n383

   The force of the KPT model is to show how what at first seems a racial
disparity - unequal stop rates - is in fact explained by dynamic strategic
action by both police and motorists. n384 As a correlative, differences in hit
rates provide evidence of taste-based discrimination.

    [*2478]  For a number of reasons, though, the KPT model is not well suited
to identify the core wrong of racially disparate policing. To begin with, KPT is
"informative only about bias in searches, not in stops." n385 It is also a model
for detecting taste-based discrimination, or animus, rather than the use of race
as an accurate generalization or the disparate racial impact of another factor
(e.g., socioeconomic status). n386 Stated otherwise, it ignores all negative
externalities from race-based policing. n387 Even in this more limited compass,
its core equilibrium concept rests on the questionable assumption that police
and motorists' know of, and dynamically adapt to, each other's behavior. n388
Extensions of their work that vary the models show that equal hit rates might
also be consistent with racial animus. n389

   Because the modeling assumptions of KPT are so controversial, and its
implications so fragile in the face of subtle changes in relevant actors'
information and motivation, in my view it does not provide a useful lens even
for the limited question of whether there is animus-based searches in the first
instance.

[*2479]

   CONCLUSION

 Aggressive deployment of Terry stops has been a point of friction between urban
police and impoverished minority communities for more than fifty years. There
has been a moment of late in which a measure of reform appeared politically
feasible - or so the recent spate of settlements and consent decrees might
suggest. n390 It may well be that this window is closing due to national-level
political changes. But the underlying problems of discriminatory policing,
popular dissatisfaction with excessive and onerous street hassle, and the
frequency of police violence will not go away. Even if the federal government
fails to act, there are local, state, and private actors with strong incentives
to press for reform. Nevertheless, without a clear account of why and when
aggressive deployment of Terry stops can be a moral wrong, we will not have a
clear sense of when or how we might deploy law to remedy it.

   To this end, this Article has aimed to specify the distinctive moral wrong of
SQF and to demonstrate that the law does have resources to identify it. My
central claim has been that a disparate-impact lens, applicable to police
pursuant to Title VI and state law, provides a better vantage point than
black-letter constitutional law. By demonstrating that a disparate-impact lens
is constitutional, potent, and practicable in terms of its implementation, I
hope to prompt a deeper conversation about the positive role that law and courts
can play in resolving the aching sore that is minority-police relations in
America's cities today.

   What I have offered here, though, is emphatically only the beginning of that
story: the law, I have shown, can be used to identify instances in which street
policing plays a role in perpetuating and deepening racial and social
stratification. Once identified, dysfunctional policing must be remedied through
political pressure and legal injunctions that will vary from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction. n391 There is no universal panacea. Police reform, moreover, is
only one element of a larger necessary program of social reform necessary to
dislodge the persistence of racialized concentrated poverty. Police do not
create ghettos. Nor will getting policing right dissolve ghettos overnight.
Nevertheless,  [*2480]  doing the hard work of police reform is a necessary step
in rectifying the historical blight of entrenched racial stratification.

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  Tracey L. Meares, The Law and Social Science of Stop and Frisk, 10 Ann.
Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 335, 337, 339 (2014).





n2.  Id. at 337; see also Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540, 589-94
(S.D.N.Y. 2013) (discussing early history of SQF in New York City).





n3.  Elliott Ramos, Poor Data Keeps Chicago's Stop and Frisk Hidden from
Scrutiny, WBEZ 91.5 Chic. (Sept. 13, 2013), http://www.wbez.org/news/poor
-data-keeps-chicagos-stop-and-frisk-hidden-scrutiny-108670 (describing use of
stop and frisk in Chicago, but noting absence of sound record-keeping).





n4.  See, e.g., Erica Goode, Philadelphia Defends Policy on Frisking, with
Limits, N.Y. Times, July 12, 2012, at A11.





n5.  Laird Harrison, Oakland Police Consultant Defends "Stop, Ask and Frisk,'
KQED News (Feb. 25, 2013),
http://blogs.kqed.org/newsfix/2013/02/25/oakland-police-consultant-defends-stop-
ask-and-frisk (discussing SQF policies in Los Angeles and Oakland).





n6.  In Chicago, for example, "being stopped for investigative purposes is the
predominant experience residents have with the police." Wesley G. Skogan,
Stop-and-Frisk and Trust in Police in Chicago (Inst. for Pol'y Res., Working
Paper No. WP-16-08 (2016)), http://www.ipr.northwestern.edu/publications/papers/
2016/WP-16-08.html (emphasis omitted).





n7.  ACLU of Ill., Stop and Frisk in Chicago 11 (2015), http://www.aclu
-il.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/ACLU_StopandFrisk_6.pdf. Because many
individuals were stopped more than once, the effect of the policy was even more
concentrated. See generally id. at 3 (describing how the stops were
disproportionately concentrated).





n8.  David Abrams, The Law and Economics of Stop-and-Frisk, 46 Loy. U. Chi. L.J.
369, 378 (2014).





n9.  U.S. Dep't of Justice, Civil Rights Div., Investigation of the Baltimore
City Police Department 25 (2016),
https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/883366/download.





n10.  Christopher Dunn, N.Y. Civil Liberties Union, Stop-and-Frisk 2012, at 3
(Jennifer Carnig ed., 2013),
https://www.nyclu.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012_ Report_NYCLU_0.pdf.





n11.  Jeffrey Fagan & Amanda Geller, Following the Script: Narratives of
Suspicion in Terry Stops in Street Policing, 82 U. Chi. L. Rev. 51, 62 (2015).





n12.  See, e.g., Jeffrey A. Fagan et al., Street Stops and Broken Windows
Revisited: The Demography and Logic of Proactive Policing in a Safe and Changing
City, in Race, Ethnicity, and Policing: New and Essential Readings 309, 312-14
(Stephen K. Rice & Michael D. White eds., 2010) (documenting disparities in
stops in the New York context); Stop and Frisk in Chicago, supra note 7, at 3
(finding the same results in Chicago).





n13.  For a snapshot of that debate, see Julie Bloom et al., Attack on Officers
Jolts a Nation on Edge, N.Y. Times, July 18, 2016, at A1.





n14.  See, e.g., John Leland & Colin Moynihan, Thousands March Silently To
Protest Stop-and-Frisk Policies, N.Y. Times, June 18, 2012, at A15 (describing a
protest in response to SQF).





n15.  See Khorri Atkinson, Mayor de Blasio To Reform Stop-and-Frisk, N.Y.
Amsterdam News (Feb. 6, 2014),
http://amsterdamnews.com/news/2014/feb/06/mayor-de-blasio-reform-stop-and-frisk
(describing a mayoral campaign focused on reforming SQF).





n16.  Aamer Madhani, Chicago Police and ACLU Agree to Stop-and-Frisk Safeguards,
USA TODAY (Aug. 7, 2015),
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2015/08/07/chicago-police-agree-reform-stop-a
nd-frisk/31277041.





n17.  Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 668, 676, 678 (S.D.N.Y. 2013)
(appointing a monitor and ordering broad systemic equitable relief).





n18.  Settlement Agreement, City of Chicago, Chi. Police Dep't & Am. Civil
Liberties Union of Ill., Investigatory Stop and Protective Pat Down (2015),
http://www.aclu-il.org/wp-content/ uploads/2015/08/2015-08-06-Investigatory
-Stop-and-Protective-Pat-Down-Settlement-Agreeme.pdf [hereinafter Chicago
Settlement].





n19.  Settlement Agreement, Class Certification, & Consent Decree at 4-5, Bailey
v. City of Philadelphia (E.D. Pa. 2010) (C.A. No. 10-5952),
http://www.aclupa.org/download_file/view_inline/744/198 [hereinafter
Philadelphia Settlement].





n20.  Collaborative Agreement, In re Cincinnati Policing (S.D. Ohio 2002) (No.
C-1-99-317) (on file with author); see also In re Cincinnati Policing, 209
F.R.D. 395, 400-04 (S.D. Ohio 2002) (affirming settlement).





n21.  United States v. City of New Orleans, 947 F. Supp. 2d 601, 631 (E.D. La.
2012), aff'd, 731 F.3d 434 (5th Cir. 2013) (affirming consent decree); Consent
Decree Regarding the New Orleans Police Department, United States v. City of New
Orleans, No. 12-1924 (E.D. La. 2012) [hereinafter New Orleans Decree] (on file
with author).





n22.  Settlement Agreement and Stipulated [Proposed] Order of Resolution, United
States v. City of Seattle, (W.D. Wash. 2012) (No. 12-CV-1282) [hereinafter
Seattle Settlement] (on file with author); see also Mahoney v. Holder, 62 F.
Supp. 3d 1215, 1218 (W.D. Wash. 2014) (describing settlement process).





n23.  United States & City of Balt., Agreement in Principle Between the United
States and the City of Baltimore Regarding the Baltimore City Police Department
(2016), https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/883376/download [hereinafter Baltimore
Agreement].





n24.  Josh Saul, America Has a Stop-and-Frisk Problem. Just Look at
Philadelphia, Newsweek (May 18, 2016),
http://www.newsweek.com/2016/06/10/stop-and-frisk-philadelphia-crisis-reform-pol
ice-460951.html.





n25.  Id.





n26.  Stanford Univ., SPARQ: Social Psychological Answers to Real-World
Questions, Strategies for Change: Research Initiatives and Recommendations To
Improve Police-Community Relations in Oakland, Calif. 5-6 (Jennifer L. Eberhardt
ed., 2016), https://stanford.app .box.com/v/Strategies-for-Change [hereinafter
Oakland Report]; Boston Police Commissioner Announces Field Interrogation and
Observation (FIO) Study Results, bpdnews.com (Oct. 8, 2014),
http://bpdnews.com/news/2014/10/8/boston-police-commissioner-announces-field-int
errogation-and-observation-fio -study-results (reporting some racial disparities
in both stops and frisks).





n27.  392 U.S. 1 (1968).





n28.  Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540, 567 (S.D.N.Y. 2013)
(quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 22). Separately, the Fourth Amendment requires that
an officer "reasonably suspect that the person stopped is armed and dangerous"
before conducting a protective pat-down, or frisk. Id. at 568 (quoting United
States v. Lopez, 321 F. App'x 65, 67 (2d Cir. 2009)).





n29.  442 U.S. 256 (1979).





n30.  Id. at 662 (quoting Hayden v. Paterson, 594 F.3d 150, 163 (2d Cir. 2010)).





n31.  Seattle Settlement, supra note 22, PP 140, 142, 145.





n32.  Philadelphia Settlement, supra note 19, at 1, 4.





n33.  John Knowles et al., Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches: Theory and
Evidence, 109 J. Pol. Econ. 203, 205 (2001).





n34.  Daryl J. Levinson, Framing Transactions in Constitutional Law, 111 Yale
L.J. 1311, 1313-14 (2002) ("Constitutional cases, like common-law ones, are
typically conceptualized as discrete transactions in which government inflicts
harm on some individual by making her worse off relative to some baseline
position or, under equality rules, relative to some reference individual or
group.").





n35.  Bernard E. Harcourt & Tracey L. Meares, Randomization and the Fourth
Amendment, 78 U. Chi. L. Rev. 809, 821 (2011) (offering this description of New
York City's policy). The dominant "individualism" of Equal Protection
jurisprudence has long been subject to decisive and devastating critique. Owen
M. Fiss, Groups and the Equal Protection Clause, 5 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 107, 127
(1976).





n36.  I use the term "moral wrong" to signal that my argument is not centrally
normative, and not legal in nature. My analysis, presented in Part II, is
consequentialist in nature. It is my view that the range of relevant
consequences for an evaluation of public policy is capacious, and not limited to
narrowly drawn monetizable harms. Recognizing the normative nature of any effort
to identify salient costs and benefits, I flag in my analysis those costs or
benefits that rest on a potentially contestable moral judgment.





n37.  See Andrew Manuel Crespo, Systemic Facts: Toward Institutional Awareness
in Criminal Courts, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 2049, 2051, 2057 (2016) (criticizing
"criminal courts' transactional myopia" and their lack of "a holistic picture of
how the criminal justice system operates").





n38.  See Aziz Z. Huq, Judicial Independence and the Rationing of Constitutional
Remedies, 65 Duke L.J. 1, 4 (2015) ("The Court has developed a gatekeeping rule
of fault for individualized constitutional remedies ... ."); Jennifer E. Laurin,
Trawling for Herring: Lessons in Doctrinal Borrowing and Convergence, 111 Colum.
L. Rev. 670, 706 (2011) (same); see also Aziz Z. Huq & Genevieve Lakier, The
Triumph of Fault in Public Law, 131 Harv. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2018),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2940016 (mapping out the
role of fault concepts in both substantive criminal law and the law of
constitutional remedies).





n39.  See 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(k)(1)(A)(i) (2012) ("[A] complaining party
demonstrates that a respondent uses a particular employment practice that causes
a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national
origin and the respondent fails to demonstrate that the challenged practice is
job-related for the position in question and consistent with business
necessity."); see also Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 429-30 (1971)
(allowing disparate impact under the 1964 version of Title VII). A
disparate-impact theory of liability is also available under the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act. Smith v. City of Jackson, 544 U.S. 228, 240
(2005).





n40.  Tex. Dep't of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc., 135
S. Ct. 2507, 2513, 2515, 2526 (2015) (interpreting 42 U.S.C. §§3604(a), 3605(a)
(1988) to permit disparate-impact liability).





n41.  See generally Richard A. Primus, Equal Protection and Disparate Impact:
Round Three, 117 Harv. L. Rev. 494, 520-23 (2003) (discussing the evidentiary
use of disparate-impact liability).





n42.  See id. at 523-24 (arguing that disparate impact is a "mechanism[] for
ending segregation and racial hierarchy").





n43.  Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (1976) ("Our cases have not
embraced the proposition that a law or other official act, without regard to
whether it reflects a racially discriminatory purpose, is unconstitutional
solely because it has a racially disproportionate impact."). Prior to Davis,
disparate impact was an important element of the constitutional doctrine in this
domain. Reva B. Siegel, Foreword, Equality Divided, 127 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 13-16
(2013) (collecting cases).





n44.  Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and its implementing regulations
apply to police departments that receive federal funds. 42 U.S.C. § 2000d (2012)
("No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or
national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of,
or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving
Federal financial assistance."); see also 28 C.F.R. § 42.101 (2016)
(implementing regulations). The Safe Streets Act also prohibits local police
action with a racially disparate impact. 42 U.S.C. § 3789d(c)(1) (2012) ("No
person in any State shall on the ground of race, color, religion, national
origin, or sex be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or
be subjected to discrimination under or denied employment in connection with any
programs or activity funded in whole or in part with funds made available under
this chapter."); see also 28 C.F.R. § 42.201 (2016) (implementing regulations).





n45.  Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2 § 11135 (2017); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 22, § 11154
(c), (i) (2017).





n46.  740 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 23/5(a)(1) (2003).





n47.  See infra Part III.A.





n48.  Chicago Settlement, supra note 18, at 6; New Orleans Decree, supra note
21, at 1-2.





n49.  See generally David A. Harris, Across the Hudson: Taking the Stop and
Frisk Debate Beyond New York City, 16 N.Y.U. J. Legis. & Pub. Pol'y 853, 871-72
(2013) (describing how some consent decrees and settlements require data
collection).





n50.  Larger policy has a role in shaping street-level outcomes. See Shannon
Portillo & Danielle S. Rudes, Construction of Justice at the Street Level, 10
Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 321, 331 (2014) ("When police routinize stop and frisk
policies, and ... ration services, attempt to control uncertainty, husband
worker resources, and manage consequences of routines, they do so within the
confines of existing policy.").





n51.  Precinct or beat-level effects can be captured through multilevel modeling
techniques in which data on stops is structured so that individual racial groups
are nested within precincts. See Report of Jeffrey Fagan, Ph.D at 40, Floyd v.
City of N.Y., 813 F. Supp. 2d 417 (S.D.N.Y. 2011) (08 Civ. 01034 (SAS)),
https://ccrjustice.org/sites/default/files/assets /files/Expert_Report_
JeffreyFagan.pdf [hereinafter Fagan Report] (describing modeling technique);
Andrew Gelman et al., An Analysis of the New York City Police Department's
"Stop-and-Frisk" Policy in the Context of Claims of Racial Bias, 102 J. Am.
Stat. Ass'n 813, 817-18 (2007) (same).





n52.  See Sharad Goel et al., Precinct or Prejudice? Understanding Racial
Disparities in New York City's Stop-and-Frisk Policy, 10 Annals Applied Stat.
365, 371 (2016) [hereinafter Goel et al., Precinct or Prejudice?] (describing
tools); see also Sharad Goel et al., Combatting Police Discrimination in the Age
of Big Data, 20 New Crim. L. Rev. 181, 186 (2017) [hereinafter Goel et al.,
Combatting Police Discrimination].





n53.  See Abrams, supra note 8, at 375 (discussing potential justifications).





n54.  The availability of employer justifications has been the subject of
dispute both on the Supreme Court and in Congress. See 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2
(k)(1)(A)(i) (2012) ("[An employer must] demonstrate that the challenged
practice is job related for the position in question and consistent with
business necessity."); Michael Selmi, The Supreme Court's Surprising and
Strategic Response to the Civil Rights Act of 1991, 46 Wake Forest L. Rev. 281,
287-89 (2011) (describing disagreements between legislators and President George
H.W. Bush on this topic). Compare Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 490 U.S.
642, 659 (1989) (describing a relatively lenient standard for business
justifications), with id. at 671-72 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (advocating for a
more demanding standard).





n55.  See Pamela L. Perry, Two Faces of Disparate Impact Discrimination, 59
Fordham L. Rev. 523, 573-74 (1991) (noting the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission indicates the threshold should be "four-fifths ... of the rate for
the group with the highest rate," but also stating alternative views).





n56.  Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557, 595-96 (2009) (Scalia, J., concurring)
("The war between disparate impact and equal protection will be waged sooner or
later, and it behooves us now to begin thinking about how - and on what terms -
to make peace between them.").





n57.  Michael Selmi, Was the Disparate Impact Theory a Mistake?, 53 UCLA L. Rev.
701, 706 (2006) ("Disparate impact theory has produced less change than
typically assumed ... ."); see also George Rutherglen, Abolition in a Different
Voice, 78 Va. L. Rev. 1463, 1476 (1992) (reviewing Richard A. Epstein, Forbidden
Grounds: The Case Against Employment Discrimination Laws (1992) and arguing that
Epstein overstates the impact of disparate-impact theory).





n58.  See Goel et al., Combatting Police Discrimination, supra note 52, at
28-30.





n59.  Tracey L. Meares, Programming Errors: Understanding the Constitutionality
of Stop-and-Frisk as a Program, Not an Incident, 82 U. Chi. L. Rev. 159, 162-63
(2015); accord Fagan & Geller, supra note 11, at 61 ("Stop-and-frisk as
envisioned by the Terry Court was largely a set of distinct "retail'
transactions, characterized by individualization, material or visual indicia,
and specificity. But the current "wholesale' practice is quite different from
the vision of the Terry Court.").





n60.  R. Richard Banks, Beyond Profiling: Race, Policing, and the Drug War, 56
Stan. L. Rev. 571, 574 (2003).





n61.  Gabriel J. Chin & Charles J. Vernon, Reasonable but Unconstitutional:
Racial Profiling and the Radical Objectivity of Whren v. United States, 83 Geo.
Wash. L. Rev. 882, 884 n.2 (2015) (collecting the large legal scholarly
literature on racial profiling).





n62.  See, e.g., R. Richard Banks, Race-Based Suspect Selection and Colorblind
Equal Protection Doctrine and Discourse, 48 UCLA L. Rev. 1075, 1080 (2001)
("Suspect description reliance, like racial profiling, is both useful and
racially discriminatory."); Samuel R. Gross & Katherine Y. Barnes, Road Work:
Racial Profiling and Drug Interdiction on the Highway, 101 Mich. L. Rev. 651,
654-55 (2002) ("As we use the term, "racial profiling' occurs when a law
enforcement officer questions, stops, arrests, searches, or otherwise
investigates a person because the officer believes that members of that person's
racial or ethnic group are more likely than the population at large to commit
the sort of crime the officer is investigating."); Samuel R. Gross & Debra
Livingston, Racial Profiling Under Attack, 102 Colum. L. Rev. 1413, 1415 (2002)
(same). Outside the legal academy, racial profiling is also defined in
criminological, economic, and normative terms. Robin S. Engel, A Critique of the
"Outcome Test' in Racial Profiling Research, 25 Just. Q. 1, 6 (2008)
(summarizing different approaches). My analysis of SQF overlaps with Engel's
"economic" and "normative" models. Id.





n63.  For an example of this broader lens, see Michael D. White & Henry
Fradella, Stop and Frisk: The Use and Abuse of a Controversial Policing Tactic
81-102 (2016) (discussing "collateral consequences" of SQF). The "disparate
impact" analysis defines its central analytic focus in terms of "purposeful"
discrimination rather than differential effects. J. Mitchell Pickerill et al.,
Search and Seizure, Racial Profiling, and Traffic Stops: A Disparate Impact
Framework, 31 Law & Pol'y 1, 8 (2009). This is not how the term is used in the
legal scholarship, and I do not follow that definition.





n64.  See Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540, 556 (S.D.N.Y. 2013)
("This Court's mandate is solely to judge the constitutionality of police
behavior, not its effectiveness as a law enforcement tool.").





n65.  392 U.S. 1 (1968). The Terry Court did not provide the canonical
formulation of the Fourth Amendment standard but instead more ambiguously asked
whether "the facts available to the officer at the moment of the seizure or the
search "warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief' that the action taken
was appropriate?" Id. at 21-22.





n66.  Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 123 (2000). The earliest use of the
phrase "reasonable, articulable suspicion" was twelve years after Terry in Brown
v. Texas, as an unattributed quotation from the state's brief. 443 U.S. 47, 51
(1979). The phrase was used to create common law first in the case Florida v.
Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 502 (1983).





n67.  Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143, 146 (1972) (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at
24).





n68.  Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 123; see also United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7
(1989).





n69.  The standard view in criminology is that arrests are a highly
discretionary decision because they are dispersed, somewhat aleatory in timing,
and hence hard to supervise. See Geoffrey P. Alpert et al., Police Suspicion and
Discretionary Decision Making During Citizen Stops, 43 Criminology 407, 408
(2005); see also Eisha Jain, Arrests as Regulation, 67 Stan. L. Rev. 809, 817
(2015). Even where law imposes a duty on officers to make an arrest (for
example, in domestic violence cases), officers as a practical matter maintain a
measure of discretion as to what to do.





n70.  See Meares, supra note 59, at 175.





n71.  Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 18, 19 tbl.1; see also supra text
accompanying notes 7-11 (citing stop rates in New York and Chicago).





n72.  Plaintiffs' Fifth Report to Court and Monitor on Stop and Frisk Practices
at 20, Bailey v. City of Philadelphia, No. 10-5952 (E.D. Pa. Feb. 24, 2015),
https://www.aclupa.org/download_file/view_inline/2230/198.





n73.  Amanda Geller, The Process Is Still the Punishment: Low-Level Arrests in
the Broken Windows Era, 37 Cardozo L. Rev. 1025, 1029-31 (2016) (distinguishing
the two approaches); see also Jeffrey Bellin, The Inverse Relationship Between
the Constitutionality and Effectiveness of New York City "Stop and Frisk," 94
B.U. L. Rev. 1495, 1504-07 (2014) (same).





n74.  George L. Kelling & James Q. Wilson, Broken Windows: The Police and
Neighborhood Safety, The Atlantic (Mar. 1982),
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/304465.





n75.  Geller, supra note 73, at 1032 (noting, based on New York data, that
"relatively few street stops lead to arrest"). That said, broken windows
policing and a concomitant rise in the rate of arrests tend to be geographically
collocated with SQF.





n76.  See Kelling & Wilson, supra note 74. A decisive critique is offered in
Bernard E. Harcourt, Illusion of Order: The False Promise of Broken Windows
Policing 166-80 (2001).





n77.  David Weisburd et al., Could Innovations in Policing Have Contributed to
the New York City Crime Drop Even in a Period of Declining Police Strength? The
Case of Stop, Question and Frisk as a Hot Spots Policing Strategy, 31 Just. Q.
129, 141, 142 tbl.1 (2014) (finding that five percent of intersections in New
York produced about fifty percent of SQFs in 2009 and fifty-six percent in
2010).





n78.  For empirical evidence, see Ruth D. Peterson & Lauren J. Krivo,
Macrostructural Analyses of Race, Ethnicity, and Violent Crime: Recent Lessons
and New Directions for Research, 31 Ann. Rev. Soc. 331, 347-52 (2005); Ronald C.
Kramer, Poverty, Inequality, and Youth Violence, 567 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. &
Soc. Sci. 123, 124-25 (2000).





n79.  Stop and Frisk in Chicago, supra note 7, at 9.





n80.  Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540, 560 (S.D.N.Y. 2013); see
also Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 3-4 (explaining neighborhood differences).





n81.  Amy E. Lerman & Vesla M. Weaver, Arresting Citizenship: The Democratic
Consequences of American Crime Control 41 (2014).





n82.  About forty-nine percent of black men and forty-four percent of Latino men
will be arrested by age twenty-three. Robert Brame et al., Demographic Patterns
of Cumulative Arrest Prevalence by Ages 18 and 23, 60 Crime & Delinq. 471, 478
(2014).





n83.  See, e.g., Shane Dixon Kavanaugh, Commissioner Kelly Says Almost 75% of
Violent Crime Committed by African-Americans, N.Y. Daily News (May 2, 2013),
http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/commissioner-kelly
-defends-stop-and-frisk-targeting-african-americans-article-1.1332840#
ixzz2UiHaXcKt; Ray Kelly, Ray Kelly: The NYPD: Guilty of Saving 7,383 Lives,
Wall St. J. (July 22, 2013),
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887324448104578616 333588719320; Azi
Paybarah, Ray Kelly: By the Department's Count, African-Americans Are Being
Understopped, Politico (May 2, 2013),
http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2013/05/ray
-kelly-by-the-departments-count-african-americans-are-being-understopped
-000000; see also Heather Mac Donald, How To Increase the Crime Rate Nationwide,
Wall St. J. (June 11, 2013), http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424127887324063304578525850909628878 (defending racially disparate street
policing on the ground that "the preponderance of crime perpetrators, and
victims, in New York are also minorities").





n84.  The earliest programmatic use of SQF I have been able to identify occurred
in Cincinnati's Avondale neighborhood in 1958. Alex Elkins, The Origins of
Stop-and-Frisk, Jacobin (May 9, 2015),
http://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/05/stop-and-frisk-dragnet-ferguson-baltimore. SQF
was subsequently used in cities such as San Francisco in the 1960s. Christopher
Lowen Agee, The Streets of San Francisco: Policing and the Creation of a
Cosmopolitan Liberal Politics, 1950-72, at 35-39 (2014). During most of the
twentieth century, however, the use of street patrols was in the decline. Eric
H. Monkkonen, History of Urban Policing, 15 Crime & Just. 547, 554 (1992). Up to
the 1960s, policing was "primarily reactive," an orientation modified by the
rise of community policing. James J. Willis, A Recent History of the Police, in
The Oxford Handbook of Police and Policing 3, 6-7 (Michael D. Reisig & Robert J.
Kane eds., 2014). A 1966 study of Chicago police, for example, found they spent
one percent of their time proactively stopping people, fourteen percent of their
time reacting to the public's calls, and eighty-five percent of their time on
unstructured random patrols. Lawrence W. Sherman, The Rise of Evidence-Based
Policing: Targeting, Testing, and Tracking, 42 Crim & Just. 377, 378 (2013).





n85.  Nat'l Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, Report of the National
Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders 158-61 (1968).





n86.  Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 14 (1968).





n87.  William Julius Wilson, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban
Poor 12 (1996).





n88.  See Leo Eisenstein & Laura Gottesdiener, Why Michael Bloomberg Is Wrong
About Stop-and-Frisk, Rolling Stone (May 22, 2013), http://www
.rollingstone.com/politics/news/why-michael-bloomberg-is-wrong-about-stop
-and-frisk-20130522 ("Mayor Michael Bloomberg and Police Commissioner Ray Kelly
have dismissed these concerns, claiming that stop-and-frisk has dramatically
reduced the city's murder rate.").





n89.  See sources cited supra note 80.





n90.  James Q. Wilson, Just Take Away Their Guns, N.Y. Times (Mar. 20, 1994),
http://www.nytimes.com/1994/03/20/magazine/just-take-away-their
-guns.html?pagewanted=all.





n91.  Id.





n92.  Benjamin Bowling, The Rise and Fall of New York Murder, 39 Brit. J.
Criminology 531, 534 (1999).





n93.  Id. at 534 fig.1, 535 fig.2.





n94.  Lawrence W. Sherman & Dennis P. Rogan, Effects of Gun Seizures on Gun
Violence: "Hot Spots" Patrol in Kansas City, 12 Just. Q. 673, 684 (1995).





n95.  Meares, supra note 1, at 340; accord Bellin, supra note 73, at 1505 ("The
NYPD uses stop-and-frisk to find guns and deter gun-carrying.").





n96.  Complaint PP 83-84, Bailey v. City of Philadelphia, No. 10-5952 (E.D. Pa.
2010), https://www.aclupa.org/download_file/view_inline/669/198.





n97.  City of Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S. 41, 49 (1999). Ten years earlier,
another class action alleged that Chicago police would improperly "arrest, ...
charge and ... detain ... persons for disorderly conduct ... with no intent to
prosecute such charges in court." Thompson v. City of Chicago, 104 F.R.D. 404,
404 (N.D. Ill. 1984). Approximately 100,000 people were arrested in these
operations. Stop and Frisk in Chicago, supra note 7, at 5.





n98.  Stop and Frisk in Chicago, supra note 7, at 6, 11.





n99.  There is an enormous empirical literature to this effect. A useful summary
is Janet J. Lauritsen & Robert J. Sampson, Minorities, Crime, and Criminal
Justice, in The Handbook of Crime and Punishment 58, 65-70 (Michael Tonry ed.,
1998); Peterson & Krivo, supra note 78; Robert J. Sampson et al., Neighborhoods
and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy, 277 Sci. 918, 919,
923 (1997).





n100.  See Glenn Firebaugh & Chad R. Farrell, Still Large, but Narrowing: The
Sizable Decline in Racial Neighborhood Inequality in Metropolitan America,
1980-2010, 53 Demography 139, 144 (2016) (analyzing data from 1980 to 2010 and
finding a "greater concentration of blacks and Hispanics in poorer-than-average
neighborhoods" in urban contexts); see also Robert J. Sampson, Great American
City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect (2012) (describing racial
character of concentrated poverty in Chicago). For correlations between poverty,
crime, and racial segregation, see Edward S. Shihadeh & Nicole Flynn,
Segregation and Crime: The Effect of Black Social Isolation on the Rates of
Black Urban Violence, 74 Soc. Forces 1325, 1345 (1996) ("Segregation is a major
predictor of the rates of homicide and robbery among blacks.").





n101.  Lincoln Quillian, Segregation and Poverty Concentration: The Role of
Three Segregations, 77 Am. Soc. Rev. 354, 354-55 (2012) (finding that black
poverty concentration stems from the complex interaction of racial segregation,
poverty-status segregation within race, and segregation of blacks from high-and
middle-income members of other racial groups).





n102.  Jeffrey Fagan & Garth Davies, Street Stops and Broken Windows: Terry,
Race, and Disorder in New York City, 28 Fordham Urb. L.J. 457, 474 (2000) ("In
urban areas, many poor people of color live in conditions of residential
segregation, concentrated poverty, and unemployment that predict the breakdown
of community social processes, which in turn predict elevated crime rates.").





n103.  Franklin E. Zimring, The Great American Crime Decline 10 fig.1.5 (2007).





n104.  See, e.g., Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540, 591 (S.D.N.Y.
2013) (describing defendant's argument that "the apparently disproportionate
stopping of blacks and Hispanics can be explained on race-neutral grounds by
police deployment to high crime areas and by racial differences in crime
rates").





n105.  See John R. Logan et al., Segregation of Minorities in the Metropolis:
Two Decades of Change, 41 Demography 1, 7 (2004) (finding that despite modest
declines in racial segregation, blacks remain more segregated from whites than
Hispanics or Asians).





n106.  Douglas S. Massey & Jonathan Tannen, A Research Note on Trends in Black
Hypersegregation, 52 Demography 1025, 1027-28 (2015).





n107.  Steven R. Holloway et al., The Racially Fragmented City? Neighborhood
Racial Segregation and Diversity Jointly Considered, 64 Prof. Geographer 63,
69-70 (2012).





n108.  Patrick Sharkey, Spatial Segmentation and the Black Middle Class, 119 Am.
J. Soc. 903, 905-06 (2014).





n109.  Paybarah, supra note 83; accord sources cited supra note 83. For
scholarly defenses of SQF and its effect on violent crime, see David Rudovsky &
Lawrence Rosenthal, Debate, The Constitutionality of Stop-and-Frisk in New York
City, 162 U. Pa. L. Rev. Online 117, 141 (2013) (describing Rosenthal's
endorsement of SQF on public safety grounds); Bellin, supra note 73, at 1538
("[A] high volume of arbitrary frisks is essential to effectively deterring gun
possession."). Bellin's position, however, is more nuanced and careful than
Rosenthal's insofar as he concludes that SQF is not narrowly tailored as
required by the application of strict scrutiny under Equal Protection doctrine.
Id. at 1546.





n110.  Meares, supra note 1, at 344.





n111.  Charles R. Epp et al., Pulled over: How Police Stops Define Race and
Citizenship 32-33 (2014) (describing and discussing both studies).





n112.  Edmund F. McGarrell, Steven Chermak, Alexander Weiss & Jeremy Wilson,
Reducing Firearms Violence Through Directed Police Patrol, 1 Criminology & Pub.
Pol'y 119, 136-37 (2001).





n113.  Id. at 145.





n114.  Christopher S. Koper & Evan Mayo-Wilson, Police Crackdowns on Illegal Gun
Carrying: A Systematic Review of Their Impact on Gun Crime, 2 J. Experimental
Criminology 227, 238, 245-46 (2006).





n115.  Id. at 248-49.





n116.  Richard Rosenfeld & Robert Fornango, The Impact of Police Stops on
Precinct Robbery and Burglary Rates in New York City, 2003-2010, 31 Just. Q. 96,
97 (2012). Rosenberg and Fornango persuasively argue that a 2008 study that did
find a negative relation between SQF and crime was methodologically flawed
because it failed to include precinct-level socioeconomic effects or year fixed
effects. Id. at 103.





n117.  David F. Greenberg, Studying New York City's Crime Decline:
Methodological Issues, 31 Just. Q. 154, 181-82 (2014); accord Jeffrey A. Fagan
et al., Street Stops and Broken Windows Revisited: The Demography and Logic of
Proactive Policing in a Safe and Changing City, in Race, Ethnicity, and
Policing: New and Essential Readings 309 (Stephen K. Rice & Michael D. White
eds., 2010) (reporting study findings that increased rates of police stops and
decreased efficiency of those stops disproportionately affects particular
neighborhoods).





n118.  Franklin E. Zimring, The City that Became Safe: New York's Lessons for
Urban Crime and Its Control 148-49 (2012).





n119.  Id. at 145.





n120.  Id. at 147-48. I am grateful to John Rappaport for discussion on this
point.





n121.  Toni Monkovic, Ted Cruz Was Wrong on Murders in New York, but Perception
Is Hard To Shake, N.Y. Times (Apr. 21, 2016),
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/22/upshot/ted-cruz-was-wrong-on-murders-in-new-yo
rk-but-perception-is-hard-to-shake.html.





n122.  Rob Arthur & Jeff Asher, Gun Violence Spiked - and Arrests Declined - in
Chicago Right After the Laquan McDonald Video Release, FiveThirtyEight (Apr. 11,
2016), http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/gun
-violence-spiked-and-arrests-declined-in-chicago-right-after-the-laquan
-mcdonald-video-release.





n123.  See id.





n124.  At least one commentator cites a 2006 study of a multi-pronged
anti-narcotics strategy in New York City public housing as evidence of the
efficacy of SQF. Lawrence Rosenthal, The Limits of Second Amendment Originalism
and the Constitutional Case for Gun Control, 92 Wash. U. L. Rev. 1187, 1251,
n.295 (2015). But the study in question involved a program that "combined
several strategies in a comprehensive design to prevent and control drug use:
police enforcement, drug treatment, drug prevention, coordination of services
with health and social service agencies, and development of the social
infrastructure of formal and informal supervision groups in the housing
authorities." Jeffrey Fagan et al., The Paradox of the Drug Elimination Program
in New York City Public Housing, 13 Geo. J. Poverty L. & Pol'y 415, 417 (2006).
It is plainly incorrect to rely on this sort of multi-pronged effort, in which
the effects of one policy might be contingent on the manner in which another is
operationalized as a basis for drawing inferences about the narrower tactic of
SQF.





n125.  For a challenge to the small-scale effects, see Epp et al., supra note
111, at 153-54 ("Nor is it clear that investigatory stops help reduce the crime
rate ... .").





n126.  Anthony A. Braga & David L. Weisburd, Policing Problem Places 9 (2010).
More generally, proactive policing of various kinds (not necessarily involving
stops) is also associated with crime-control effects. Charis E. Kubrin et al.,
Proactive Policing and Robbery Rates Across U.S. Cities, 48 Criminology 57, 62
(2010).





n127.  Cody W. Telep & David Weisburd, What Is Known About the Effectiveness of
Police Practices in Reducing Crime and Disorder?, 15 Police Q. 331, 333-34
(2012) ("The evidence base for hot spots policing is particularly strong ...
."). For exemplary studies using randomized and controlled experiments, see
Anthony A. Braga & Brenda J. Bond, Policing Crime and Disorder Hot Spots: A
Randomized Controlled Trial, 46 Criminology 577 (2008); Anthony A. Braga et al.,
Problem-Oriented Policing in Violent Crime Places: A Randomized Control
Experiment, 37 Criminology 541 (1999).





n128.  Fagan & Geller, supra note 11, at 79-80. This factor can also be used in
inapposite and illogical ways. Id. at 85 (noting that "High Crime Area" was
often provided as a justification for stops in public housing putatively
targeting trespassers, but without any explanation of why the suspicion of
trespass arose).





n129.  In Part I.B infra, I develop a catalog of costs associated with SQF. Many
of these costs flow from the sheer volume and concentration of stops. Because
hot-spot policing is more focused, many of these criticisms do not apply to it.
This is another reason to distinguish hot-spot policing and SQF qua urban
policing strategies.





n130.  Telep & Weisburd, supra note 127, at 333-41; accord Braga & Bond, supra
note 127, at 599 (reporting results from a controlled, randomized study in
Lowell, Massachusetts, and suggesting that the strongest crime-prevention
benefits were driven by situational strategies that attempted to modify the
criminal opportunity structure at crime and disorder hot-spot locations).





n131.  David Weisburd et al., Do Stop, Question and Frisk Practices Deter Crime?
Evidence at Microunits of Space and Time, 15 Criminology & Pub. Pol'y 31, 48-49
(2015); id. at 47 (noting that in their estimate, high-volume use of SFQ would
produce "only a 2% decline in crime," which they characterize as "relatively
small").





n132.  Id. at 49-50. Another study conducted by Weisburd similarly finds
"modest" effects that are concentrated in space and time. Alese Wooditch & David
Weisburd, Using Space-Time Analysis To Evaluate Criminal Justice Programs: An
Application to Stop-Question-Frisk Practices, 32 J. Quant. Crim. 191, 191
(2015).





n133.  Cf. Steven D. Levitt, Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring To Estimate
the Effects of Police on Crime: Reply, 92 Am. Econ. Rev. 1244, 1244 (2002)
(presenting evidence of a "large, negative impact of police on crime").





n134.  Braga & Bond, supra note 127, at 599.





n135.  Anthony A. Braga et al., The Effects of Hot Spot Policing on Crime: An
Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis, 31 Just. Q. 633, 640, 655-56
(2014).





n136.  Id.





n137.  Id. at 656.





n138.  For an excellent survey of diverse views on the police function, see The
Future of Policing (Jennifer M. Brown ed., 2014).





n139.  See, e.g., James Q. Wilson, Varieties of Police Behavior: The Management
of Law and Order in Eight Communities 200-26 (1968) (describing a "service
style" of policing).





n140.  See, e.g., Tracey L. Meares, Praying for Community Policing, 90 Cal. L.
Rev. 1593 (2002) (describing an effort by police in Chicago to build relations
with African-American churches).





n141.  Wesley G. Skogan, Police and Community in Chicago: A Tale of Three Cities
247 (2006) (discussing community policing in Chicago in the early 1990s).





n142.  Elizabeth Anderson, The Imperative of Integration 41-42 (2010) (noting
disparate access to public-order resources in cities such as Los Angeles).





n143.  Jessica Trounstine, Segregation and Inequality in Public Goods, 60 Am. J.
Pol. Sci, 709, 720 (2016).





n144.  Cent. Austin Neighborhood Ass'n v. City of Chicago, 1 N.E.3d 976 (Ill.
App. Ct. 2013) (describing longer wait times for 911 calls in minority
neighborhoods).





n145.  Mac Donald, supra note 83.





n146.  See sources cited supra note 83.





n147.  See Vesla M. Weaver, Frontlash: Race and the Development of Punitive
Crime Policy, 21 Stud. Am. Pol. Dev. 230, 235 (2007); see also Dennis D. Loo &
Ruth-Ellen M. Grimes, Polls, Politics, and Crime: The "Law and Order" Issue of
the 1960s, 5 W. Criminology Rev. 50, 50 (2004) (discussing origins of public
concerns about crime in the 1960s).





n148.  See generally Jonathan P. Jackson, A Psychological Perspective on
Vulnerability in the Fear of Crime, 15 Psychol. Crime & L. 365 (2009) (examining
factors that impact fear of crime).





n149.  But see supra text accompanying notes 126-30 (suggesting that hot spot
policing is better supported empirically as a crime-control measure than SQF).





n150.  It seems likely to me that some non-minorities gain satisfaction from
policies that confirm their prior belief that minorities are responsible for
social ills such as crime, a belief that helps obscure the ways in which both
national and state social provision have long disproportionately benefited
non-minority populations. For the canonical historical analysis on this point,
see Ira Katznelson, When Affirmative Action Was White: An Untold History of
Racial Inequality in the Twentieth Century (2005). SQF, that is, is a policy
that simultaneously confirms racial resentment and assuages white guilt. As
such, it has large psychological payoffs for the correctly disposed non-minority
populations. See also Michael Tesler, The Conditions Ripe for Racial Spillover
Effects, 26 Advances Pol. Psych. 101, 101 (2015) (summarizing evidence of
continued high levels of racial resentment).





n151.  What if African-American residents subject to SQF do not benefit from the
policy and do not support it? If SQF nonetheless mitigates white fear of crime,
the policy will have an unmitigated regressive distributive effect. Steven N.
Durlauf, Assessing Racial Profiling, 116 Econ. J. F402, F412 (2006).





n152.  Riggs v. Palmer, 22 N.E. 188, 190 (N.Y. 1889).





n153.  In Chicago, the argument might well be personalized given the lengthy
tenure of Richard M. Daley in office.





n154.  Robert J. Sampson & William Julius Wilson, Toward a Theory of Race,
Crime, and Urban Inequality, in Crime and Inequality 37, 42 (John Hagan & Ruth
D. Peterson eds., 1995). More recently, the financial crisis has deepened the
effect of segregation. Jacob S. Rugh & Douglas S. Massey, Racial Segregation and
the American Foreclosure Crisis, 75 Am. Soc. Rev. 629, 634 (2010) ("The housing
boom and the immense profits it generated frequently came at the expense of poor
minorities living in central cities and inner suburbs who were targeted by
specialized mortgage brokers and affiliates of national banks and subjected to
discriminatory lending practices."). The best historical case-study is Thomas
Sugrue's canonical history of post-war Detroit. Thomas J. Sugrue, The Origins of
the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality in Postwar Detroit (1996).





n155.  Sampson & Wilson, supra note 154, at 43. See generally Erika K. Wilson,
Leveling Localism and Racial Inequality Through the No Child Left Behind Act
Public Choice Provision, 44 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 625, 649-51 (2011) (analyzing
the ways in which explicit government policies caused racial residential
segregation in the suburbs and urban cities). Such policies also existed at the
federal level. See Douglas Massey & Nancy Denton, American Apartheid:
Segregation and the Making of the Underclass (1993). For a recent accounting in
the legal scholarship, see Sarah Schindler, Architectural Exclusion:
Discrimination and Segregation Through Physical Design of the Built Environment,
124 Yale L.J. 1934, 1955-56 (2015) (discussing the role of the Federal Housing
Authority in fostering urban racial segregation).





n156.  See Arnold R. Hirsch, Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in
Chicago 1940-1960, at 23-24, 64-68, 222-23 (1983) (discussing political
resistance to the diffusion of public housing, motivated by opposition to racial
integration); accord D. Bradford Hunt, Blueprint for Disaster: The Unraveling of
Chicago Public Housing 85-86 (2009). Private violence also played a large role
in Chicago. Hirsch, supra note 156, at 215-18.





n157.  See, e.g., Myron Orfield, Land Use and Housing Policies To Reduce
Concentrated Poverty and Racial Segregation, 33 Fordham Urb. L.J. 877, 888-89
(2006); Christopher Serkin & Leslie Wellington, Putting Exclusionary Zoning in
Its Place: Affordable Housing and Geographical Scale, 40 Fordham Urb. L.J. 1667,
1667-73 (2013).





n158.  An additional complication arises if a municipality that adopts SQF
simultaneously pursues policies that either entrench or preserve concentrated
minority poverty.





n159.  On the difficulty of African-American exit from concentrated poverty via
economic improvement, see Mary Patillo-McCoy, Black Picket Fences: Privilege and
Peril Among the Black Middle Class 24-27 (1999).





n160.  Devah Pager & Hannah Shepherd, The Sociology of Discrimination in
Employment, Housing, Credit, and Consumer Markets, 34 Ann. Rev. Soc. 181, 188
(2008).





n161.  Because not all have been rigorously empirically tested, I will carefully
identify what data exists respecting each pathway. Where data is absent, I will
offer (with appropriate caveats) reasoned hypotheses.





n162.  Mitchell Duneier argues that "the black ghetto has been the site of a
series of vicious cycles in which space plays a distinctive role." Mitchell
Duneier, Ghetto: The Invention of a Place, the History of an Idea 223 (2016). I
stress the role of neighborhood rather than "space" in the following.





n163.  Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 16-17 (1968).





n164.  See, e.g., Carol S. Steiker, Terry Unbound, 82 Miss. L.J. 329, 338-39
(2013).





n165.  Amanda Geller et al., Aggressive Policing and the Mental Health of Young
Urban Men, 104 Am. J. Pub. Health 2321, 2321-22 (2014).





n166.  For a vivid account of the associated dignitary harms, see Nicholas K.
Pert, Why Is the N.Y.P.D. After Me?, N.Y. Times (Dec. 17, 2011), http://www
.nytimes.com/2011/12/18/opinion/sunday/young-black-and-frisked-by-the-nypd .html
("Essentially, I incorporated into my daily life the sense that I might find
myself up against a wall or on the ground with an officer's gun at my head.").





n167.  This may have been the case in New York. Joseph Goldstein, Stop-and-Frisk
Trial Turns to Claim of Arrest Quotas, N.Y. Times (Mar. 20, 2013),
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/21/nyregion/stop-and-frisk-trial-focuses-on
-claim-of-arrest-quotas.html (describing evidence that police officers were told
to meet quotas in New York City).





n168.  See, e.g., Maryland v. Wilson, 519 U.S. 408, 414-415 (1997) (stressing
the risk of harm to officers while characterizing the cost to those under the
control of the officers of being physically moved as "minimal").





n169.  The Fourth Amendment provides limited protection from non-deadly force.
The Court employs a loose standard to review excessive non-deadly force claims.
Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 395-96 (1988) (employing a reasonableness
standard). The "indeterminacy" of the standard undermines the risk of ex post
liability under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 or Bivens, both of which require a "clear"
legal rule to be violated. Rachel A. Harmon, When Is Police Violence Justified?,
102 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1119, 1140-41 (2008). Since Graham does not supply a "clear"
rule, there is rarely tort liability for excessive non-deadly force. Id.





n170.  Roland G. Fryer, Jr., An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in
Police Uses of Force 3 (July 2016) (unpublished draft), http://scholar
.harvard.edu/files/fryer/files/main-july_2016.pdf. For earlier work on
increasing usage of disproportionate police force in minority neighborhoods,
particularly when that minority was perceived as a demographic threat to a
majority, see Robert J. Kane, The Social Ecology of Police Misconduct, 40
Criminology 867, 887-88 (2002) (discussing the changing distribution of police
force in New York City between the 1970s and the 1990s).





n171.  Fryer, supra note 170, at 31.





n172.  Skogan, supra note 6, at 9.





n173.  See infra text accompanying notes 331-34 (addressing the argument that
SQF is justified because of minority community support).





n174.  On the concept of legal cynicism, see generally David S. Kirk & Andrew V.
Papachristos, Cultural Mechanisms and the Persistance of Neighborhood Violence,
116 Am. J. Soc. 1190 (2011) (exploring the consequences of legal cyncisim).





n175.  Tom R. Tyler & Cheryl J. Wakslak, Profiling and Police Legitimacy:
Procedural Justice, Attributions of Motive, and Acceptance of Police Authority,
42 Criminology, 253, 276-78 (2004) ("To effectively deal with racial distrust of
the police in the minority community it is important to regulate not only the
selection of the people whom the police stop, but also the manner in which they
[sic] conduct stops as well."). Sherry Colb has raised doubts that such
"targeting harm" is likely to arise because individuals stopped do not know the
police's motivations and therefore cannot know if there is racial animus. Sherry
F. Colb, Innocence, Privacy, and Targeting in Fourth Amendment Jurisprudence, 96
Colum. L. Rev. 1456, 1500 (1996). After Colb made this argument, however, Epp
and colleagues demonstrated empirically that minority motorists subject to
vehicular stops based on minor regulatory offense are quite aware of the fact
that similarly situated white motorists would not have been stopped, and make
strong negative judgments of the police as a result. Epp et al., supra note 111,
at 117-18.





n176.  Patrick J. Carr et al., We Never Call the Cops and Here Is Why: A
Qualitative Examination of Legal Cynicism in Three Philadelphia Neighborhoods,
45 Criminology 445, 457 (2007). A parallel result was obtained in a study in St.
Louis. Rod K. Brunson, Police Don't Like Black People: African-American Young
Men's Accumulated Police Experiences, 6 Criminology & Pub. Pol'y 71, 71-72
(2007) (detailing study that examined African-American mens' experiences and
lack of trust of police).





n177.  Carr et al., supra note 176, at 459; accord Robert J. Sampson & Dawn
Jelgum Bartusch, Legal Cynicism and (Subcultural?) Tolerance of Deviance: The
Neighborhood Context of Racial Differences, 32 Law & Soc'y Rev. 777, 793 (1998)
(finding "perceptions of injustice and alienation from police" in Chicago
neighborhoods of concentrated poverty, but rejecting the hypothesis that this
stems from a "black subculture of deviance"). Alice Goffman's recent ethnography
of impoverished Philadelphia confirms this. See also Alice Goffman, On the Run:
Fugitive Life in an American City (2014).





n178.  A recent study in St. Louis, Missouri, using a quantitative methodology,
similarly found that "two-thirds of the young men [in the study] said the police
are almost never easy to talk to, nearly half said the police are almost never
polite." Rod K. Brunson & Jody Miller, Young Black Men and Urban Policing in the
United States, 46 Brit. J. Criminology 613, 622 (2006). These results suggest
that it cannot be assumed that most stops are perceived as positive or neutral.





n179.  Tom R. Tyler et al., Street Stops and Police Legitimacy: Teachable
Moments in Young Urban Men's Legal Socialization, 11 J. Emp. L. Stud. 751, 772,
figs. 3 & 4 (2014).





n180.  Skogan, supra note 6, at 13.





n181.  For a summary of research into police legitimacy, see Stephen J.
Schulhofer et al., American Policing at a Crossroads: Unsustainable Policies and
the Procedural Justice Alternative, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 335, 338
(2011) ("Compliance with the law and willingness to cooperate with enforcement
efforts are primarily shaped not by the threat of force or the fear of
consequences, but rather by the strength of citizens' beliefs that law
enforcement agencies are legitimate.").





n182.  Matthew Desmond et al., Police Violence and Citizen Crime Reporting in
the Black Community, 81 Am. Soc. Rev. 857, 870 (2016).





n183.  See Epp et al., supra note 111, at 117 ("African-Americans and Latinos
have developed and share with each other an extensive body of knowledge about
police behavior and police stops."); accord Victor M. Rios, Punished, Policing
the Lives of Black and Latino Boys 54-57 (2011) (detailing the "code" Latinos
and blacks in the inner city develop to survive violent communities).





n184.  See William J. Stuntz, Terry's Impossibility, 72 St. John's L. Rev. 1213,
1217 (1998) ("If the police and, through them, the criminal justice system, come
to be seen as illegitimate, the norms of law-abiding behavior could unravel,
with the streets becoming less safe, not more so.").





n185.  See Robert J. Sampson, When Things Aren't What They Seem: Context and
Cognition in Appearance-Based Regulation, 125 Harv. L. Rev. F. 97, 105 (2012)
("In communities with high levels of intersubjectively shared cynicism of police
misbehavior and the perceived irrelevance of legal rules, violence is higher.").





n186.  The best study of which I am aware is David C. Pyrooz et al., Was There a
Ferguson Effect on Crime Rates in Large U.S. Cities?, 46 J. Crim. Just. 1, 7
(2016) which finds an effect only for homicide and robbery, and only in cities
with large impoverished minority communities.





n187.  Joshua Correll et al., The Police Officer's Dilemma: Using Ethnicity To
Disambiguate Potentially Threatening Individuals, 83 J. Personality & Soc.
Psychol. 1314, 1321-28 (2002) (finding subjects - instructed to act as officers
- were quicker to use force against blacks than whites).





n188.  See Joscha Legewie & Jeffrey Fagan, Group Threat, Police Officer
Diversity, and the Deadly Use of Police Force 2-4 (2016) (unpublished
manuscript) (on file with author).





n189.  This is an instance of what Adam Samaha calls "appearance driving
reality." Adam M. Samaha, Regulation for the Sake of Appearance, 125 Harv. L.
Rev. 1563, 1577 (2012).





n190.  The expert report in the New York litigation gestures at this dynamic
when it explains why propensity score matching is infeasible as a measure of
testing for discriminatory motives. Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 97-98.





n191.  Lincoln Quillian, New Approaches to Understanding Racial Prejudice and
Discrimination, 32 Ann. Rev. Soc. 299, 309 (2006).





n192.  Jeffrey Fagan et al., Reciprocal Effects of Crime and Incarceration in
New York City Neighborhoods, 30 Fordham Urb. L.J. 1551, 1554 (2003).





n193.  See Khalil Gibran Muhammad, The Condemnation of Blackness: Race, Crime,
and the Making of Modern Urban America (2010) (exploring the ways in which at
the beginning of the twentieth century, policymakers in Northern cities began
linking crime to African Americans on the basis of genetic and predispositional
arguments).





n194.  Robert J. Sampson & Stephen W. Raudenbush, Seeing Disorder: Neighborhood
Stigma and the Social Construction of "Broken Windows," 67 Soc. Psychol. Q. 319,
319-20 (2004) (finding that perceptions of disorder in a neighborhood were
better predicted by the racial composition of a neighborhood than by actual
disorder).





n195.  Lincoln Quillian & Devah Pager, Black Neighbors, Higher Crime? The Role
of Racial Stereotypes, 107 Am. J. Soc. 717, 718 (2001) ("The percentage of a
neighborhood's black population, particularly the percentage [of] young black
men, is significantly associated with perceptions of the severity of a
neighborhood's crime problem.").





n196.  Annabelle Lever makes the related and important point that race-based
policing often "reflects racist attitudes, institutions and habits while
obscuring its contribution to them." Annabelle Lever, Why Racial Profiling Is
Hard To Justify: A Response to Risse and Zeckhauser, 33 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 94, 97
(2005) (emphases omitted).





n197.  Travis L. Dixon & Keith B. Maddox, Skin Tone, Crime News, and Social
Reality Judgments: Priming the Stereotype of the Dark and Dangerous Black
Criminal, 35 J. App. Soc. Psych. 1555, 1555-56 (2005).





n198.  Jennifer L. Hochschild & Vesla Weaver, The Skin Color Paradox and the
American Racial Order, 86 Soc. Forces 643, 644 (2007).





n199.  Anderson, supra note 142, at 42.





n200.  Lerman & Weaver, supra note 81, at 150-51 (presenting a range of tests
reflecting Americans' levels of trust in government).





n201.  Id. at 222-23. In a separate article, Lerman and Weaver find parallel
results in a New York sample. Amy E. Lerman & Vesla M. Weaver, Staying out of
Sight? Concentrated Policing and Local Political Action, 651 Annals Am. Acad.
Pol. & Soc. Sci. 202, 204 (2014) (finding in a study of New York that
"witnessing stops that occur with little justification and that feature physical
force can make people feel occupied and powerless, and can incentivize
disengagement with government").





n202.  Todd R. Clear, The Effect of High Imprisonment Rates on Communities, 37
Crime & Just. 97, 116 (2008).





n203.  Robert J. Sampson, Neighborhood Effects, Causal Mechanisms, and the
Social Structure of the City, in Analytic Sociology and Social Mechanisms 227,
232 (P. Demeulenaere ed., 2011).





n204.  Jeffrey D. Morenoff et al., Neighborhood Inequality, Collective Efficacy,
and the Spatial Dynamics of Urban Violence, 39 Criminology 517, 551 (2001)
(finding that measures of lower collective efficacy in a neighborhood
independently predict increased homicide risk); Robert J. Sampson et al.,
Assessing "Neighborhood Effects': Social Processes and New Directions in
Research, 28 Ann. Rev. Soc. 443, 457 (2002) (same); Sampson et al., supra note
99, at 918.





n205.  Orlando Patterson, The Social and Cultural Matrix of Black Youth, in The
Cultural Matrix: Understanding Black Youth 45, 47 (O. Patterson & Ethan Fosse
eds., 2015).





n206.  Sara Wakefield & Christopher Wildeman, Children of the Prison Boom: Mass
Incarceration and the Future of American Inequality 41 (2014) ("For black
children ... the risk of having a father imprisoned before their fourteenth
birthday was one in four.").





n207.  See supra Part I.B.2.





n208.  Accord Randall Kennedy, Race, Crime, and the Law 161 (1997) (arguing that
greater expenditures on police is always an alternative to racial profiling).





n209.  Elizabeth Hinton, "A War Within Our Boundaries': Lyndon Johnson's Great
Society and the Rise of the Carceral State, 102 J. Am. Hist. 100, 101 (2015).





n210.  Id. at 111. Indeed, the larger a city's black population, the more it
spent on policing through the 1970s. Pamela Irving Jackson & Leo Carroll, Race
and the War on Crime: The Sociopolitical Determinants of Municipal Police
Expenditures in 90 Non-Southern U.S. Cities, 46 Am. Soc. J. 290, 302-03 (1981)
(finding that a city's black population was a "significant predictor of
expenditures for police salaries and operations").





n211.  Cf. Duneier, supra note 162 (noting that African-American "ghettos," as
he calls them, are still characterized by a policy of "withholding resources and
opportunities for poor blacks").





n212.  Pager & Shepherd, supra note 160, at 182 ("Beyond more conventional forms
of individual racism, institutional processes ... are important to consider.").





n213.  Reva B. Siegel, Discrimination in the Eyes of the Law: How "Color
Blindness" Discourse Disrupts and Rationalizes Social Stratification, 88 Cal. L.
Rev. 77, 82 (2000) ("Social stratification is constituted through features of
(1) social structure (institutions or practices) and (2) social meaning (stories
or reasons).").





n214.  See Zimring, supra note 118, at 149 ("Aggressiveness in policing is a
costly strategy because it imposes real disadvantages on exactly the minority
poor who can least afford additional handicaps.").





n215.  Naomi Murakawa & Katherine Beckett, The Penology of Racial Innocence: The
Erasure of Racism in the Study and Practice of Punishment, 44 L. & Soc. Rev.
695, 701 (2010).





n216.  See R. Richard Banks, Beyond Profiling: Race, Policing, and the Drug War,
56 Stan. L. Rev. 571, 594-98 (2003) ("The social harms of incarceration ... are
likely to be underappreciated in the racial profiling debate.").





n217.  In a much-noted analysis, Mathias Risse and Richard Zeckhauser posit a
form of profiling that has large crime-control gains, and then argue that "much
of the harm ostensibly done by profiling" should be ascribed to "systematic
racism rather than the acts of profiling." Mathias Risse & Richard Zeckhauser,
Racial Profiling, 32 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 131, 145 (2004). My argument here is
aimed at showing this claim of separation, however plausible in their
hypothesized framework, does not hold in the world, and that the benefits of
eliminating SQF would not (as they put it) be "comparatively modest." Id. at
149. Similarly, it is not the case that "African American communities ... incur
short-term costs while benefiting in the long run" from SQF. Id. at 163.





n218.  See sources cited supra note 83.





n219.  Even our impoverished Equal Protection doctrine, see infra Part II, does
not overtly treat accuracy as a sufficient justification for the use of racial
classifications. David A. Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 Sup. Ct.
Rev. 99, 119.





n220.  Pers. Adm'r of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 279 (1979).





n221.  Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21-22 (1968); see also United States v.
Arvizu, 534 U.S. 266, 274 (2002) (noting that reasonable articulable suspicion
is considerably lower than the preponderance of evidence standard).





n222.  Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 332 (1990).





n223.  United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 563 (1980) (Powell, J.,
concurring) ("Among the circumstances that can give rise to reasonable suspicion
are the agent's knowledge of the methods used in recent criminal activity and
the characteristics of persons engaged in such illegal practices.").





n224.  Kentucky v. King, 563 U.S. 452, 464 (2011) ("Our cases have repeatedly
rejected a subjective approach, asking only whether the circumstances, viewed
objectively, justify the action." (quoting Brigham City, Utah v. Stuart, 547
U.S. 398 (2006)).





n225.  Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 813 (1996) ("We think these cases
foreclose any argument that the constitutional reasonableness of traffic stops
depends on the actual motivations of the individual officers involved.").





n226.  See Christopher Slobogin, Testilying: Police Perjury and What To Do About
It, 67 U. Colo. L. Rev. 1037, 1040 (1996).





n227.  Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleave, Chicago's Racist Courts, N.Y. Times, Apr. 15,
2016, at A27; see also Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleave, Crook County: Racism and
Injustice in America's Largest Criminal Court 146-53 (2016) (discussing perjury
and abuse by police).





n228.  See, e.g., William Glaberson, In Tiny Courts of New York, Abuses of Law
and Power, N.Y. Times, Sept. 25, 2006, at A1 (documenting racial and sexual
bigotry in New York State courts).





n229.  Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 30 (1968); see also United States v. Cortez,
449 U.S. 411, 417-18 (1981) ("Based upon that whole picture the detaining
officers must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the
particular person stopped of criminal activity."). In some instances, the Court
has used language that suggests a resistance to settling on a specific quantum
of suspicion. See, e.g., Illinois v. Wardlow, 528 U.S. 119, 123 (2000) ("While
"reasonable suspicion' is a less demanding standard than probable cause and
requires a showing considerably less than preponderance of the evidence, the
Fourth Amendment requires at least a minimal level of objective justification
for making the stop.").





n230.  See United States v. Hensley, 469 U.S. 221, 229 (1985).





n231.  Terry, 392 U.S. at 33.





n232.  See, e.g., United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 562-63 (1976)
(determining that secondary of inspection of motorists do not violate the
Constitution even if referrals are made largely on the basis of Mexican
ancestry); Brown v. City of Oneonta, 221 F.3d 329, 339 (2d Cir. 2000) ("Yet our
role is not to evaluate whether the police action in question was the
appropriate response under the circumstances, but to determine whether what was
done violated the Equal Protection Clause.").





n233.  235 F.3d 769, 779 (2d Cir. 2000) (Calabresi, J., dissenting from denial
of rehearing en banc); see also Bela August Walker, The Color of Crime: The Case
Against Race-Based Suspect Descriptions, 103 Colum. L. Rev. 662, 673-74 (2003)
(describing other cases of blanket searches for black suspects, and noting the
absence of even anecdotal evidence of the same happening for white suspects).





n234.  Further discretion arises when police use predictive algorithms, such as
PredPol, to forecast crime patterns. See Erica Goode, Sending the Police Before
There's a Crime, N.Y. Times (Aug. 15, 2011),
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/16/us/16police.html.





n235.  William J. Stuntz, The Political Constitution of Criminal Justice, 119
Harv. L. Rev. 781, 782 (2006).





n236.  William J. Stuntz, Race, Class, and Drugs, 98 Colum. L. Rev. 1795, 1821
(1998).





n237.  528 U.S. 119, 124 (2000).





n238.  Fagan & Geller, supra note 11, at 79; see also Andrew Guthrie Ferguson &
Damien Bernache, The "High Crime Area" Question: Requiring Verifiable and
Quantifiable Evidence for Fourth Amendment Reasonable Suspicion Analysis, 57 Am.
U. L. Rev. 1587, 1609 (2008) ("What is termed a "high-crime area' can differ
from case to case, and jurisdiction to jurisdiction.").





n239.  See supra text accompanying notes 194-95.





n240.  Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 124.





n241.  136 S. Ct. 2056, 2063 (2016).





n242.  Id. at 2059.





n243.  Id. at 2060.





n244.  Id.





n245.  Id.





n246.  Id.





n247.  Id.





n248.  Id. at 2064.





n249.  Id. at 2063.





n250.  Id.





n251.  Id.





n252.  Id. at 2068 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).





n253.  Issa Kohler-Hausmann, Managerial Justice and Mass Misdemeanors, 66 Stan.
L. Rev. 611, 659 (2014).





n254.  Streiff, 136 S. Ct. at 2068 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).





n255.  The link between Terry stops and outstanding warrants is not a new one.
In the late 1990s, New York police realized that quality-of-life stops could be
leveraged into frequent arrests that removed many from the streets. See Bernard
E. Harcourt, Reflecting on the Subject: A Critique of the Social Influence
Conception of Deterrence, the Broken Windows Theory, and Order-Maintenance
Policing New York Style, 97 Mich. L. Rev. 291, 341 n.210 (1998) (describing
Mayor Rudy Giuliani's endorsement of this tactic in 1998).





n256.  Equally, Strieff is an incentive for police departments to fail to train
adequately their officers on the factual predicates of a Terry stop. See
generally Strieff, 136 S. Ct. at 2063 ("Officer Fackrell was at most
negligent.").





n257.  See, e.g., Adam Liptak, Supreme Court Says Police May Use Evidence Found
After Illegal Stops, N.Y. Times (June 20, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/21/us/supreme-court-says-police-may-use-evidence
-found-after -illegal-stops.html (noting reports cited in the dissent of Justice
Sotomayor that claimed that there are outstanding warrants out on 16,000 of
21,000 residents in Ferguson, Missouri).





n258.  See Rachel A. Harmon, The Problem of Policing, 110 Mich. L. Rev. 761, 779
(2012) ("Anyone who has experienced a Terry stop, however, knows that the harm
to dignity can be substantial. And anyone who has been frisked knows that the
invasion affects bodily integrity far more than privacy.").





n259.  See Adam Liptak, In Dissents, Sonia Sotomayor Takes on the Criminal
Justice System, N.Y. Times (July 4, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/05/us/politics/in-dissents-sonia-sotomayor-takes
-on-the-criminal-justice-system.html.





n260.  Strieff, 136 S. Ct. at 2061.





n261.  Id. at 2073-74 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).





n262.  See, e.g., United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 917 (1984) ("Judges and
magistrates are not adjuncts to the law enforcement team; as neutral judicial
officers, they have no stake in the outcome of particular criminal prosecutions.
The threat of exclusion thus cannot be expected significantly to deter them.");
see also Messerschmidt v. Millender, 565 U.S. 535, 548-49 (2012) (reiterating
Leon's deterrence-based logic); Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229, 236-37
(2011) (same).





n263.  136 S. Ct. at 2063.





n264.  Id. at 2072-73 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).





n265.  In a similar vein, David Sklansky has pointed out that the Court toggles
without any principled basis between rules and standards in Fourth Amendment
case-law in ways that inure to the government's benefit. See David A. Sklansky,
Traffic Stops, Minority Motorists, and the Future of the Fourth Amendment, 1997
Sup. Ct. Rev. 271, 294-98.





n266.  See Hudson v. Michigan, 547 U.S. 586, 598 (2006) ("Another development
over the past half-century that deters civil-rights violations is the increasing
professionalism of police forces, including a new emphasis on internal police
discipline.").





n267.  For a discussion of how these problems arise, and why common state and
local rules exacerbate them, see Aziz Z. Huq & Richard McAdams, Litigating the
Blue Wall of Silence: How To Challenge the Police Privilege To Delay
Investigation, 2016 U. Chi. Legal F. 213, 213-26.





n268.  Fisher v. Univ. of Tex. at Austin, 136 S. Ct. 2198, 2208 (2016) (quoting
Fisher v. Univ. of Tex. at Austin, 133 S. Ct. 2411, 2418 (2013)).





n269.  This is a bit imprecise. "Often, courts do not approach the question
whether a statute uses express racial classifications on formal grounds at all.
Instead, the grounds of decision are normative." See Primus, supra note 41, at
509.





n270.  Pers. Adm'r of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 279 (1979).





n271.  442 U.S. 256, 279 (1979) (citation omitted). The same standard applies to
both religious and racial discrimination. See Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662,
677 (2009).





n272.  See Vill. of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252,
264-65 (1977) ("Official action will not be held unconstitutional solely because
it results in a racially disproportionate impact." (citing Washington v. Davis,
426 U.S. 229, 242 (1976))).





n273.  543 U.S. 499, 502-03 (2005) (describing prison policy).





n274.  Id. at 505 ("All racial classifications [imposed by government] ... must
be analyzed by a reviewing court under strict scrutiny." (citation omitted)).





n275.  221 F.3d 329, 337 (2d Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 235 F.3d 769 (2000).





n276.  Such cases are rare, but not unknown. In the 2015 Supreme Court Term, for
example, the Court found that the Georgia Supreme Court had made a "clearly
erroneous" decision when it declined to find that prosecution use of preemptory
strikes in a capital case was not animated by a discriminatory purpose. Foster
v. Chatman, 136 S. Ct. 1737, 1747-55 (2016). This is an extremely rare ruling,
and is explained by the graphic evidence of naked racial reasoning
(inadvertently) discovered by the defendant. Id. at 1744. This is not the only
instance, though, in which a finding of discriminatory purpose in the use of
preemptory challenges has led to a conviction being vacated. See, e.g., Snyder
v. Louisiana, 552 U.S. 472, 478 (2008).





n277.  481 U.S. 279 (1987).





n278.  McCleskey was quickly pilloried, and has been much criticized since. See,
e.g., Randall L. Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital Punishment, and the
Supreme Court, 101 Harv. L. Rev. 1388, 1389 (1988) ("Professor Bedau does not
exaggerate when he compares McCleskey to Plessy and Korematsu."). Even Justice
Powell, who provided a fifth vote in the case, expressed regret for that vote.
David Von Drehle, Retired Justice Changes Stand on Death Penalty, Wash. Post,
June 10, 1994, at A1. It is not without interest that another case in which
Justice Powell cast the deciding vote, and later expressed regret, has since
been overruled. Anand Agneshwar, Ex-Justice Says He May Have Been Wrong, Nat'l
L.J., Nov. 5, 1990, at 3 (noting Powell's regret at having cast a deciding vote
in Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986), which was overruled in Lawrence v.
Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003)).





n279.  McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 286-87. The race-of-the-defendant effect
identified in the Baldus study, however, was relatively small in comparison to
race-of-the-victim effects. Id.





n280.  Although McCleskey has been much criticized, it is still worth
reiterating here that many of its reasons for rejecting statistical evidence are
plainly spurious. For example, the Court asserted that an unlawful purpose might
more safely be inferred if there were "fewer entities" and "fewer variables."
Id. at 294-95. But the confidence generated by regression increases with size -
it does not decrease. And the more alternative explanations for variance exist,
the more plausible defenses the state has. Further, the Court stated that
"discretion is essential to the criminal justice process; we would demand
exceptionally clear proof before we would infer that the discretion has been
abused." Id. at 297. This is hard to understand; in the absence of discretion,
there would be no opportunity for a state actor to take a decision motivated by
a discriminatory purpose. To insulate discretionary decisions from review for
such invalid purposes is to say in effect that there is no
discriminatory-purpose liability in the criminal law.





n281.  Id. at 315, n.38.





n282.  Id. at 339 (Brennan, J., dissenting) ("The Court next states that its
unwillingness to regard petitioner's evidence as sufficient is based in part on
the fear that recognition of McCleskey's claim would open the door to widespread
challenges to all aspects of criminal sentencing ... Such a statement seems to
suggest a fear of too much justice.").





n283.  See, e.g., Lewis v. Casey, 518 U.S. 343, 376 (1996) (Thomas, J.,
concurring) (noting "the potentially radical implications" of inferences from
statistical evidence of racial disparities in the criminal-justice context).





n284.  See Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540, 603 (S.D.N.Y. 2013)
(quoting the highest ranking uniformed officer of the New York Police Department
as mandating stops of young black and Hispanic youth between the ages of
fourteen and twenty).





n285.  The Court has also limited discovery respecting evidence of racial bias
in the prosecutorial context to instances in which a defendant can already point
to clear evidence of bias. See United States v. Armstrong, 517 U.S. 456, 470
(1996). Armstrong's somewhat circular standard has been roundly criticized. See,
e.g., Richard H. McAdams, Race and Selective Prosecution: Discovering the
Pitfalls of Armstrong, 73 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 605, 606 (1998) (contending that
standard established by the Court in Armstrong is nearly impossible for many
defendants with meritorious claims to satisfy).





n286.  See Siegel, supra note 43, at 47 (drawing parallel between Feeney and the
doctrine of double effect).





n287.  See Strauss, supra note 219, at 114-15 (discussing the cognitive
consequences of such pervasive correlations).





n288.  See, e.g., City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 493 (1989)
("Classifications based on race carry a danger of stigmatic harm. Unless they
are strictly reserved for remedial settings, they may in fact promote notions of
racial inferiority and lead to a politics of racial hostility.").





n289.  See, e.g., Parents Involved in Cmty. Sch. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1,
551 U.S. 701, 746 (2007) (expressing concern that the use of racial
classifications will exacerbate racial hostility and conflict and will
effectively divide the nation into segments based on race).





n290.  See, e.g., Rice v. Cayetano, 528 U.S. 495, 517 (2000) ("One of the
principal reasons race is treated as a forbidden classification is that it
demeans the dignity and worth of a person to be judged by ancestry instead of by
his or her own merit and essential qualities.").





n291.  See supra sources cited in note 83 (quoting, inter alia, New York Police
Commission Ray Kelly to the effect that it makes sense to stop minorities
because minorities tend to commit crime).





n292.  As such it might be applied more generally to policing tactics, including
hot-spot policing.





n293.  401 U.S. 424 (1971).





n294.  See Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557, 584 (2009) (requiring "a strong
basis in evidence" to shield employer actions "to avoid violating the
disparate-impact provision" from disparate treatment liability under Title VII).





n295.  Smith v. City of Jackson, 544 U.S. 228, 240 (2005) (interpreting 29
U.S.C. § 623(a) (1998)).





n296.  Tex. Dep't of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc.,
135 S. Ct. 2507, 2513 (2015) (interpreting 42 U.S.C. §§3604(a), 3605(a) (1988)
to permit disparate-impact liability).





n297.  Primus, supra note 41, at 520-24 (exploring both accounts).





n298.  See Reva B. Siegel, Why Equal Protection No Longer Protects: The Evolving
Forms of Status-Enforcing State Action, 49 Stan. L. Rev. 1111, 1131-35 (1997)
(describing rejection of disparate impact).





n299.  42 U.S.C. § 2000d (1973).





n300.  See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. § 42.104(b)(2) (2013) (Dept. of Justice); 49 C.F.R.
§ 21.5(b)(2) (2012) (Dept. of Transp.); Implementation of the Fair Housing Act's
Discriminatory Effect Standard, 78 Fed. Reg. 11,460 (Feb. 15, 2013) (to be
codified at 24 C.F.R.§§100.5, 100.70, 100.120, 100.130, 100.500).





n301.  28 C.F.R. § 42.103 (2012).





n302.  Rachel A. Harmon, Federal Programs and the Real Costs of Policing, 90
N.Y.U. L. Rev. 870, 872 (2015).





n303.  Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275 (2001). Prior to Sandoval, private
plaintiffs challenged racially disparate policing using Title VI in Maryland
State Conference of NAACP Branches v. Maryland Department of State Police, 72 F.
Supp. 2d 560 (D. Md. 1999).





n304.  New Orleans Decree, supra note 21, at 2; Baltimore Agreement, supra note
23, at 1.





n305.  740 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 23/5 (West 2012); see also Jackson v. Cerpa,
696 F. Supp. 2d 962, 694 (N.D. Ill. 2010) ("[ICRA] was expressly intended to
provide a state law remedy that was identical to the federal disparate impact
canon."); accord McFadden v. Bd. of Educ. for Ill. Sch. Dist. U-46, 984 F. Supp.
2d 882, 890 (N.D. Ill. 2013).





n306.  For an example of a civil suit based on this provision, see Central
Austin Neighborhood Association v. City of Chicago, 1 N.E. 3d 976, 984 (Ill. Ap.
Ct. 2013) (refusing to dismiss suit on political question grounds).





n307.  Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 1154(h)(i) (2017). Subsection c of the same
provision also makes it unlawful to "provide a person with an aid, benefit or
service that is not as effective in affording an equal opportunity to obtain the
same result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement
as that provided to others. In some situations, identical treatment may be
discriminatory." Id. § 1154(c).





n308.  42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(k)(1) (2012) (requiring the identification of "a
particular employment practice that causes a disparate impact"). The causation
element reflects the Court's ruling in Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, which
has been abandoned in other respects. 490 U.S. 642, 657 (1989) ("As a general
matter, a plaintiff must demonstrate that it is the application of a specific or
particular employment practice that has created the disparate impact under
attack.").





n309.  See, e.g., Carter v. Ball, 33 F.3d 450, 456 (4th Cir. 1994) ("In a case
of discrimination in hiring or promoting, the relevant comparison is between the
percentage of minority employees and the percentage of potential minority
applicants in the qualified labor pool."); accord Lopez v. Laborers Int'l Union
Local No. 18, 987 F.2d 1210, 1216 (5th Cir. 1993); Shidaker v. Tisch, 833 F.2d
627, 631 (7th Cir. 1986).





n310.  See, e.g., Connecticut v. Teal, 457 U.S. 440, 458 (1982) (comparing
racial composition of those entering the selection process with that of people
ultimately promoted); Albemarle Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U.S. 405, 425 (1975)
(requiring that plaintiffs "show[] that the tests in question select applicants
for hire or promotion in a racial pattern significantly different from that of
the pool of applicants" (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792,
802 (1973))).





n311.  29 C.F.R. § 1607.4(D) (1978).





n312.  Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557, 587 (2009) (citations omitted).





n313.  42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(k)(1).





n314.  Id.





n315.  Young v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 135 S. Ct. 1338, 1345 (2015) (second
emphasis added).





n316.  221 F.3d 329, 334 (2d Cir. 2000).





n317.  Indeed, the Brown Court's argument that no racial classification was at
work because the suspect description also mentioned gender, as Richard Primus
explains, simply "cannot be right," because it implies that "what would be a
racial classification standing alone is not a racial classification if the
racial criterion is combined with nonracial criteria." Primus, supra note 41, at
511.





n318.  External control efforts, such as individual blame and liability, tend to
increase certain forms of racial bias. See Lisa Legault et al., Ironic Effects
of Antiprejudice Messages: How Motivational Interventions Can Reduce (but Also
Increase) Prejudice, 22 Psych. Sci. 1472, 1472-75 (2011).





n319.  Siegel, supra note 43, at 11-13 (noting that in the 1970s, "equal
protection law did not sharply distinguish proof of purpose and proof of
impact").





n320.  Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557, 594 (2009) (Scalia, J., concurring)
("Title VII's disparate-impact provisions place a racial thumb on the scales,
often requiring employers to evaluate the racial outcomes of their policies, and
to make decisions based on (because of) those racial outcomes. That type of
racial decisionmaking is, as the Court explains, discriminatory.").





n321.  Samuel R. Bagenstos, Disparate Impact and the Role of Classification and
Motivation in Equal Protection Law After Inclusive Communities, 101 Cornell L.
Rev. 1115, 1129 (2016).





n322.  135 S. Ct. 2507, 2522 (2015).





n323.  Id. (quoting Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431 (1971)).





n324.  An alternative formulation of this concern is that disparate impact does
not "operate to encourage regulated entities to classify individuals based on
race." Bagenstos, supra note 321, at 1130. Whereas in the employment context,
the shadow of disparate-impact liability might push employers toward the use of
quotas, it is hard to see how disparate impact would have this effect in the
policing context. To the contrary, in the absence of disparate impact, SQF is
arguably best understood as motivated by implicit quotas.





n325.  Bazemore v. Friday, 478 U.S. 385, 400-01 & n.10 (1986) (requiring
controls for "major factors"). Lower courts have stressed the need to avoid
controls for anything other than a legitimate justification. See, e.g., Anderson
v. Westinghouse Savannah River Co., 406 F.3d 248, 280 (4th Cir. 2005)
("Statistical evidence does not have to control for every single variable in
order to be sufficient.").





n326.  Selmi, supra note 57, at 705. For similar diagnoses, see Samuel R.
Bagenstos, The Structural Turn and the Limits of Antidiscrimination Law, 94 Cal.
L. Rev. 1, 45 (2006) ("Disparate impact doctrine has been in a massive decline
over the past few decades."); Tracy E. Higgins & Laura A. Rosenbury, Agency,
Equality, and Antidiscrimination Law, 85 Cornell L. Rev. 1194, 1204-07 (2000)
(similarly bemoaning "the decline of disparate impact").





n327.  Olatunde C.A. Johnson, Disparity Rules, 107 Colum. L. Rev. 374, 396
(2007).





n328.  Selmi, supra note 57, at 708 ("Taking seriously the disparate impact
theory would have posed a substantial challenge to existing practices, which is
precisely why the theory never has been taken particularly seriously by
courts."); see also Bagenstos, supra note 326 (making a similar point by noting
that courts dislike any departure from a "fault-based" theory of discrimination
liability).





n329.  See supra text accompanying notes 17-26.





n330.  Olatunde C.A. Johnson, The Agency Roots of Disparate Impact, 49 Harv.
C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 125, 127 (2014).





n331.  See, e.g., Tracey L. Meares & Dan M. Kahan, The Wages of Antiquated
Procedural Thinking: A Critique of Chicago v. Morales, 1998 U. Chi. Legal F.
197, 197-98 (celebrating African-American communities' demand for more
policing).





n332.  Leland & Moynihan, supra note 14 (noting African-American leadership in
protests in New York); Leonor Vivanco, 5 Young Chicago Activists Answer 5
Questions About the Movement, Redeye (Feb. 8, 2016),
http://www.redeyechicago.com/news/redeye-five-activists-answer-five-questions-20
160122-story.html (profiling leaders of anti-SQF movement in Chicago).





n333.  Elizabeth Hinton et al., Did Blacks Back the Crime Bill?, N.Y. Times,
Apr. 13, 2016, at A25.





n334.  Id.; see also Elizabeth Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on
Crime: The Making of Mass Incarceration in America 134-38, 322-23 (2016)
(tracing the "war on black crime" back to the Nixon and Reagan administrations'
policies).





n335.  Philadelphia Settlement, supra note 19, P II.B; Chicago Settlement, supra
note 18, P I.1.





n336.  This is a rather ambitious assumption. Jeffrey Fagan, Law, Social
Science, and Racial Profiling, 4 Just. Res. & Pol. 103, 112 (2002) (expressing
concerns on this front).





n337.  See sources cited supra note 83.





n338.  See sources cited supra notes 194-95.





n339.  Cf. Sarath Sanga, Does Officer Race Matter?, 16 Am. L. & Econ. Rev. 403,
405 (2014) (finding in a study of Oakland street policing that "where one is
stopped may be more important than by whom one is stopped" (emphasis omitted)).





n340.  Fagan Report, supra note 51.





n341.  Id. at 33 tbl. 5. The main regression Fagan presents contains a control
for patrol strength, while one of the sensitivity tests omits that variable. To
the extent that this analysis seeks to ascertain whether deployments at the
precinct level are justified, the inclusion of patrol strength creates a
potential included variable problem. Stated otherwise, patrol strength is a
function of deployment levels, not a justification of the latter.





n342.  Id. at 41, 31 n.52, 43. Fagan also presents a series of charts showing
stop rates per crime complaints by minority population share. Id. at 25-27.
These illustrate the same disparity.





n343.  Id. at 45.





n344.  See supra text accompanying notes 94, 74 (describing, respectively, the
Kansas City Experiment and Broken Windows policing).





n345.  See supra text accompanying notes 126-34.





n346.  See supra Part I.B.2.





n347.  Other studies have found that citizen complaints of drug transactions do
not predict narcotics-related deployment rates. Katherine Beckett et al., Race,
Drugs, and Policing: Understanding Disparities in Drug Delivery Arrests, 44
Criminology 105, 126-27 (2006).





n348.  For a further set of criticisms, see Fagan, supra note 336, at 117-18.





n349.  Tex. Dep't of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc.,
135 S. Ct. 2507, 2522 (2015) (noting that constitutional problems would arise if
"liability were imposed based solely on a showing of a statistical disparity").





n350.  Ian Ayres & Jonathan Borowsky, A Study of Racially Disparate Outcomes in
the Los Angeles Police Department 9-10 (2008),
https://www.aclusocal.org/en/study-racially-disparate-outcomes-los-angeles
-police-department.





n351.  Katherine Beckett et al., Drug Use, Drug Possession Arrests, and the
Question of Race: Lessons from Seattle, 52 Soc. Probs. 419, 435 (2005).





n352.  Beckett et al., supra note 347, at 129.





n353.  Id. at 130.





n354.  Beckett et al., supra note 351, at 433.





n355.  Id.





n356.  See, e.g., Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 40-42, 42 tbl. 7 (reporting
the results of a multilevel Poisson regression on stops by suspected crime
controlling for precinct characteristics and lagged crime conditions).





n357.  Multilevel modeling describes a school of approaches for including both
micro-and macro-level factors in the same equation to explain a single dependent
variable. Thomas A. DiPrete & Jerry D. Forristal, Multilevel Models: Methods and
Substance, 20 Ann. Rev. Soc. 331, 332-33 (1994).





n358.  See supra text accompanying notes 323-24.





n359.  Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 42, tbl. 7; see also Ayres & Borowsky,
supra note 350, at 37-38, tbl. 7.





n360.  Joshua D. Angrist & Jorn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics:
An Empiricist's Companion 11-12 (2009). For this reason, the propensity score
matching models used in some policing studies are not suitable for
disparate-impact analysis. See Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 97-100 (noting
and criticizing the use of such models elsewhere).





n361.  The racial composition of a precinct is a relevant control if it proxies
for the expected composition of persons on the street - an assumption that will
not hold in downtowns or transit hubs.





n362.  Ayres & Borowsky, supra note 350, at 13; see also Ian Ayres, Testing for
Discrimination and the Problem of "Included Variable Bias" 3-4 (2008)
(unpublished manuscript),
http://ianayres.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/Testing%20for%20
Discrimination.pdf.





n363.  Oakland report, supra note 26, at 6.





n364.  See Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 42; Ayres & Borowsky, supra note 350,
at 34. A possible variant on these reports' approaches is lagged rates of gun
crime, which bear on the violent crime-related justification at times offered
for SQF.





n365.  See supra text accompanying notes 345-47.





n366.  See Gelman et al., supra note 51.





n367.  Tammy Rinehart Kochel et al., Effect of Suspect Race on Officers' Arrest
Decisions, 49 Criminology 473, 498 (2011).





n368.  Jessica Saunders et al., Predictions Put into Practice: A
Quasi-Experimental Evaluation of Chicago's Predictive Policing Pilot, 12 J.
Experimental Criminology 347, 347 (2016).





n369.  For evidence of the very small number of those involved in gun violence,
see Andrew V. Papachristos et al., Tragic, but Not Random: The Social Contagion
of Nonfatal Gunshot Injuries, 125 Soc. Sci. & Med. 139, 139 (2015) (finding
nonfatal gun injuries were confined to "less than 6 percent" of Chicago's
population).





n370.  Jeremy Gorner, After 90 Killed in August, Chicago May Soon Pass Last
Year's Homicide Toll, Chi. Trib. (Sept. 1, 2016),
http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/ct-chicago-homicides-august
-20160901-story.html.





n371.  See supra text accompanying notes 268-72.





n372.  Beckett et al., supra note 351, at 422-23; Beckett et al., supra note
347, at 116-18.





n373.  Oakland report, supra note 26, at 15-19.





n374.  See, e.g., id. at 11-12 (describing between-officer disparities).





n375.  See supra text accompanying notes 221-24.





n376.  This has been done in a number of earlier studies. Ayres & Borowsky,
supra note 350, at 22; Fagan Report, supra note 51, at 65-69.





n377.  Id. at 69-71.





n378.  Goel et al., Combatting Police Discrimination, supra note 52, at 6.





n379.  Goel et al., Precinct or Prejudice?, supra note 52, at 371-73.





n380.  Goel et al., Combatting Police Discrimination, supra note 52, at 40-51.





n381.  Id. at 9-10 ("49% of the stops of blacks fell below the 1% probability
threshold ... but only 19% of the stops of whites.").





n382.  Knowles et al., supra note 33, at 205-07; see also Nicola Persico & Petra
E. Todd, The Hit Rate Test for Racial Bias in Motor-Vehicle Searches, 25 Just.
Q. 37, 39-42 (2008).





n383.  See Persico & Todd, supra note 382 at 42.





n384.  Id. ("[If] hit rates are equalized [across groups], then disparities in
search frequencies across groups, while possible, are not the result of police
bias.").





n385.  Id.





n386.  Engel, supra note 62, at 3.





n387.  Durlauf, supra note 151, at F407.





n388.  For example, the KPT model assumes that "in the absence of preferential
discrimination, everyone carries contraband," which is "not true." Sanga, supra
note 339, at 407. Moreover, "the quest to empirically decompose motives into
distinctly moral and economic categories can prove quixotic." Id. at 409. For an
extensive critique of this and other assumptions of the KPT model, see Robin S.
Engel & Rob Tillyer, Searching for Equilibrium: The Tenuous Nature of the
Outcome Test, 25 Just. Q. 54, 65-66 (2008). Persico and Todd cite the fact that
equal hit rates are observed as evidence that their assumptions are correct.
Persico & Todd, supra note 382, at 45. In their original paper, hit rates for
Hispanics did not equal rates for whites. Knowles et al., supra note 33, at 222;
accord Ruben Hernandez-Murillo & John Knowles, Racial Profiling or Racist
Policing? Bounds Tests in Aggregate Data, 45 Int'l Econ. Rev. 959, 972 (2004)
(same result in a Missouri sample). A subsequent analysis by Sanga of a greater
sample of the same data from Maryland used by KPT found lower hit rates for both
blacks and Hispanics. Sarath Sanda, Reconsidering Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle
Searches: Theory and Evidence, 117 J. Pol. Econ. 1155, 1159 (2009). Applying
KPT's own verification criterion, therefore, the theory fails. See id.





n389.  See, e.g., Shamena Anwar & Hanming Fang, An Alternative Test of Racial
Prejudice in Motor Vehicle Searches: Theory and Evidence, 96 Am. Econ. Rev. 127,
130-32 (2006) (accounting for officers' race); Dhammika Dharmapala & Stephen L.
Ross, Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches: Additional Theory and Evidence, 3
Contributions to Econ. Analysis & Pol'y 1, 14 (2004) (accounting for offense
severity and vehicle ownership).





n390.  See supra text accompanying notes 17-26.





n391.  For a useful examination of some possible avenues of institutional
reform, see White & Fradella, supra note 63, at 117-45 (enumerating possible
reform measures).


                               17 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                          New Straits Times (Malaysia)

                             June 10, 2017 Saturday

A.I. WILL NOT DISPLACE POLICE ANALYSTS

BYLINE: Muhammad Faizal Abdul Rahman

SECTION: Opinion; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1064 words


TECHNO-PESSIMISTS have argued that artificial intelligence (AI) technologies
will eventually displace many jobs. Martin Ford, author of Rise of the Robots:
Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future, opined that jobs that entail
computer manipulation of data in routine and predictable ways are vulnerable to
automation. For example, the predictive policing system (PredPol) deployed by
the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) reportedly outperformed experienced
LAPD analysts in forecasting crime.

Such zero-sum fears are not entirely unfounded as advances in machine learning
suggest that AI can emulate and might even surpass human abilities. To manage
the expected loss of jobs, a guiding framework for AI adoption was proposed at
the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in January, recommending approaches to
ensure that AI augments rather than replace human workers. In the same vein, the
plausible impact of AI on law enforcement jobs should be anticipated.

The mission of law enforcement is set to be more challenging, given the
confluence of burgeoning centrality of cities, evolving transnational crime and
security threats. With the use of ubiquitous police closed-circuit television
camera surveillance to counter urban terrorism, for example, police and homeland
security functions are increasingly interwoven and data-driven.

Hence, law enforcement intelligence analysts would certainly benefit from
employing both human and AI insights in the analyses of a multitude of strategic
and tactical threats. AI technologies have been trailed in predictive policing
and video surveillance, and have shown promise. Their strength is the ability to
expeditiously process massive volumes of data, detect patterns even if complex
and obscure, and emulate the human brain in learning from human inputs, and from
trial and error.

However, AI's ability to self-learn raises the concern that (human) analysts
would eventually become obsolete. PredPol, for example, tried to assuage this
concern by emphasising that its algorithms do not replace but require analysts'
inputs to perform effectively and adapt to changing needs.

The current state of AI is that its learning capacity still needs to be honed;
hence, its reliability may not be unlimited. It can, for example, decipher many
but not all aspects of criminal/human behaviour. The misbehaving chat-bot "Tay"
that learned to spew racist rants demonstrated the potential risks of AI's
limitations in terms of possible unintended consequences.

Similarly, an underperforming AI could potentially impair intelligence analysis
and drive miscalculations in operational strategy and deployment with grave
implications on public security. Given the fallibility of AI and that
intelligence analysis is too critical a security function to be entrusted
totally to it, there should be calculated human oversight of its use.

This requires law enforcement agencies to retain the tacit knowledge and
experience of analysts. According to research cited in the book Critical
Knowledge Transfer (2014) by Harvard Business School, high-level corporate
executives remain doubtful that the deep knowledge and experience of human
experts could ever be fully codified into algorithms.

Furthermore, society may be ambivalent about delegating machines with the
responsibility to solve human (crime and security) issues, as exemplified by
concerns over racial discrimination and false positives arising from the
reported use of an AI technology (Beware) by Chicago Police to generate a
"hit-list" of suspects.

Subject to the nature of threat, AI's assessments might not be comprehensive if
consumed in isolation. AI might not provide all the answers and analysts would
find it necessary to question its assessments in certain situations.

For the purposes of corroboration and plugging of information gaps, analysts
would have to fuse AI's assessments with information collected from other
sources, such as human intelligence.

Such information might reside outside databases yet appreciable as it could
relate to criminal motivation, unreported incidents and first-time offenders
(clean skins); therefore could shape operational strategies.

Adversaries may seek to outsmart law enforcement AI technologies to evade
detection and arrest by manipulating the data inputs of big data and open-source
information. Hence, the analysts' judgement and intuition could complement AI as
bulwarks against intelligent adversaries.

Analysts could be drivers rather than passengers of change by being
co-developers of AI technologies. A study on "Exploring the Potential for using
AI Techniques in Police Report Analysis" by the University of Gothenburg,
Sweden, highlighted the importance of incorporating analysts' insights into the
iterative process of machine learning to improve AI's ability to discern complex
patterns. The prospects of AI learning everything and replacing analysts could
be managed with a framework to redesign analysts' business processes to focus on
two higher-value work streams.

FIRST, given the need for human oversight, analysts could double-hat as
"algorithmists" who are internal auditors tasked with promoting best practices
in the application of AI and review its assessments to ensure standards and
accuracy; and,

SECOND, analysts could support strategy formulation through qualitative research
into the underlying and interrelated factors of threats such as cross-border,
demographic, economic and terrain issues, which may influence criminal/human
behaviour. The insights could enrich AI's data-driven assessment or develop
directions for further analyses by AI. Given finite resources, analysts could
support frontline policing by helping to prioritise threats flagged by AI. These
tasks would require analysts to foster deeper collaboration with field officers
and various stakeholders within security and non-security agencies.

Ultimately, AI would inevitably transform the intelligence analyst's profession
in law enforcement just as how the patrol car and two-way radio revolutionised
policing in the early 20th century. Given the rapid pace of technological
advances, analysts should plan forward for the changes.

The writer is research fellow with the Homeland Defence Programme at the Centre
of Excellence for National Security, a unit of the S. Rajaratnam School of
International Studies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

( END )

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


            Copyright 2017 New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad
                              All Rights Reserved


                               18 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                             Government Technology

                     Distributed by Tribune Content Agency

                              May 9, 2017 Tuesday

3 Pieces of Advice for Success in Gov Tech

BYLINE: Ben Miller, Government Technology

SECTION: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS

LENGTH: 471 words


May 09--TOP NEWS

Three Pieces of Advice for Gov Tech Companies ... straight from the people whose
careers reolvearound gov tech. At last week's TiECon 2017 summit in Santa Clara,
Calif., leaders in the field gave some practical and phiolosophical insights
into how to position a compnay to win government business.

The Company Behind ShotSpotter Is Going Public SST, which offers
gunshot-detecting systems to public safety officials, has filed preliminary
paperwork for an initial public offering with a proposed fundraising ceiling of
$35 million. The move, which put SST's financial details on display, would make
the company the seventh on the Gov Tech 100 list to hit the stock market.

Los Angeles Sets Up AI Chatbot Using Microsoft Tech The chatbot, named Chip, is
in its beta phase and is making its debut on the city's vendor and bid portal.
City employees built the bot, then Microsoft assisted with training the AI and
hosting it on its Azure cloud.

Colorado Uses "Mini-Bids" to Streameline IT Procurement State officials are
trying out a new system of prequalifying vendors for specific work, and then
sending out "mini-bids" to that pool in order to expedite IT work.

Chicago CIO Leaves Post to Push P3s Brenna Berman, Chicago's chief information
officer, has left her position to join UI Labs, where she will work to encourage
public-private partnerships in order to facilitate tech adoption.

MARKET SPOTLIGHT

The Biggest Cities Don't Always Have the Biggest Budgets ... and sometimes the
disparities between population ranking and budget ranking are pretty huge. We
take a look at the biggest city budgets and then break out the chief information
officers in those cities.

WATCHLIST

GovTech companies on our radar this week:

Acivilate: This startup has built an appto help convicts re-enter society.

Run a GovTech company? Get on our radar here.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Formula for Gov Tech Success (Nick Bowden)

How AI Could Transform Government (Deloitte University Press)

Axon's Strategy Is Starting to Look Like Predictive Policing (The Intercept)

Private Equity Flocks to the Tech Sector (Institutional Investor)

Women Are Using Savings, Not VC, to Fund Startups (Fortune)

GovTechBiz is our weekly newsletter covering the companies, deals and trends in
the business of gov tech. Got a news tip? Other feedback? We're listening. Send
it to GovTechBiz Writer Ben Miller at biz@govtech.com

Ben Miller is the business beat staff writer for Government Technology. His
reporting experience includes breaking news, business, community features and
technical subjects. He holds a Bachelor's degree in journalism from the Reynolds
School of Journalism at the University of Nevada, Reno, and lives in Sacramento,
Calif.

___ (c)2017 Government Technology Visit Government Technology at www.govtech.com
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

ACC-NO: 20170509-1GT-3-Pieces-of-Advice-for-Success-in-Gov-Tech-0509-20170509

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: 1GT


                                 Copyright 2017


                               19 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                              The Washington Post

                            February 12, 2017 Sunday
                                Regional Edition

Is big data laundering human bias?

BYLINE: Laurel Eckhouse

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 840 words


Laurel Eckhouse is a researcher with the Human Rights Data Analysis Group's
Policing Project, and a doctoral candidate in political science at the
University of California at Berkeley.

Big data has expanded to the criminal justice system. In Los Angeles, police use
computerized "predictive policing" to anticipate crimes and allocate officers.
In Fort Lauderdale, Fla., machine- learning algorithms are used to set bond
amounts. In states across the country, data-driven estimates of the risk of
recidivism are being used to set jail sentences.

Advocates say these data-driven tools remove human bias from the system, making
it more fair as well as more effective. But even as they have become widespread,
we have little information about exactly how they work. Few of the organizations
producing them have released the data and algorithms they use to determine risk.

We need to know more, because it's clear that such systems face a fundamental
problem: The data they rely on are collected by a criminal justice system in
which race makes a big difference in the probability of arrest - even for people
who behave identically. Inputs derived from biased policing will inevitably make
black and Latino defendants look riskier than white defendants to a computer. As
a result, data-driven decision-making risks exacerbating, rather than
eliminating, racial bias in criminal justice.

Consider a judge tasked with making a decision about bail for two defendants,
one black and one white. Our two defendants have behaved in exactly the same way
prior to their arrest: They used drugs in the same amount, have committed the
same traffic offenses, owned similar homes and took their two children to the
same school every morning. But the criminal justice algorithms do not rely on
all of a defendant's prior actions to reach a bail assessment - just those
actions for which he or she has been previously arrested and convicted. Because
of racial biases in arrest and conviction rates, the black defendant is more
likely to have a prior conviction than the white one, despite identical conduct.
A risk assessment relying on racially compromised criminal-history data will
unfairly rate the black defendant as riskier than the white defendant.

To make matters worse, risk- assessment tools typically evaluate their success
in predicting a defendant's dangerousness on rearrests - not on defendants'
overall behavior after release. If our two defendants return to the same
neighborhood and continue their identical lives, the black defendant is more
likely to be arrested. Thus, the tool will falsely appear to predict
dangerousness effectively, because the entire process is circular: Racial
disparities in arrests bias both the predictions and the justification for those
predictions.

We know that a black person and a white person are not equally likely to be
stopped by police: Evidence on New York's stop-and-frisk policy, investigatory
stops, vehicle searches and drug arrests show that black and Latino civilians
are more likely to be stopped, searched and arrested than whites. In 2012, a
white attorney spent days trying to get himself arrested in Brooklyn for
carrying graffiti stencils and spray paint, a Class B misdemeanor. Even when
police saw him tagging the City Hall gateposts, they sped past him, ignoring a
crime for which 3,598 people were arrested by the New York Police Department the
following year.

Before adopting risk-assessment tools in the judicial decision-making process,
jurisdictions should demand that any tool being implemented undergo a thorough
and independent peer-review process. We need more transparency and better data
to learn whether these risk assessments have disparate impacts on defendants of
different races. Foundations and organizations developing risk-assessment tools
should be willing to release the data used to build these tools to researchers
to evaluate their techniques for internal racial bias and problems of
statistical interpretation. Even better, with multiple sources of data,
researchers could identify biases in data generated by the criminal justice
system before the data is used to make decisions about liberty. Unfortunately,
producers of risk-assessment tools - even nonprofit organizations - have not
voluntarily released anonymized data and computational details to other
researchers, as is now standard in quantitative social science research.

For these tools to make racially unbiased predictions, they must use racially
unbiased data. We cannot trust the current risk-assessment tools to make
important decisions about our neighbors' liberty unless we believe - contrary to
social science research - that data on arrests offer an accurate and unbiased
representation of behavior. Rather than telling us something new, these tools
risk laundering bias: using biased history to predict a biased future.

The writer is a researcher with the Human Rights Data Analysis Group's Policing
Project and a doctoral candidate in political science at the University of
California at Berkeley.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


     Copyright 2017 Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive Company, LLC d/b/a
                            Washington Post Digital
                              All Rights Reserved


                               20 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                                US Official News

                             April 17, 2017 Monday

Maryland Department of Transportation's MTA Continues to Have Lowest Number of
Part I Crimes Among Top 12 U.S. Transit Agencies

LENGTH: 623  words

DATELINE: New York



Annapolis: The State of Maryland  has issued the following news release:


A new national study shows the Maryland Department of Transportation's Maryland
Transit Administration (MTA) was again America's safest transit system in terms
of serious crimes (Part I) in 2016 out of the top 12 transit agencies. The study
was conducted by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA).


Part I crimes are serious offenses that can occur with regularity and are likely
to be reported to police. They include aggravated assault, arson, burglary
(breaking and entering), criminal homicide, larceny theft, rape and robbery.
"The Maryland Department of Transportation's MTA has made tremendous
improvements over the past two years, thanks in large part to the launch of
Governor Hogan's BaltimoreLink plan to transform transit in the region," said
Transportation Secretary Pete Rahn. "As this study shows, the safety of our
customers remains the top priority."
The MTA had no homicides, shootings or rapes and a total of 240 Part I crimes
for the year 2016 - the lowest total of the transit systems in the cities and
states studied, which includes Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los
Angeles, New Jersey, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco and Washington, D.C.

With interagency collaboration at the federal, state and local levels, MTA
Police reported the fourth straight year of declining crime figures, according
to the study. The number of serious crimes reported has decreased from 388 in
2013 to 285 in 2014, 255 in 2015 and 240 in 2016 on MTA Local Bus, Light Rail,
Metro Subway, MARC Train, Mobility and Commuter Bus.
"Nothing is more important than the safety and security of our passengers and
operators," said MTA Administrator and CEO Paul Comfort. "We are proud to have
the fewest serious crimes of any of the top 12 transit agencies in America. The
numbers show that the MTA continues to be a very safe transit system to ride."

According to Colonel John E. Gavrilis, MTA Chief of Police, "The low crime rate
on the MTA's transit system is the result of the hard work and dedication of the
men and women on the MTA Police Force. Our message is clear and it is that we
will not tolerate criminal activity on the transit system."
The MTA Police Force added 20 uniformed police officer positions over the last
two years to enhance its available resources. MTA Police utilize the Compstat
process to smartly deploy its resources (data driven deployment/predictive
policing) and have embraced the latest technologies available in security
monitoring as a force multiplier. The MTA Police Force has approximately 49
memorandums of agreement with federal, state and local agencies, which greatly
enhances its ability to provide a police response to patrons across the state.

The Maryland Department of Transportation's (MDOT) Maryland Transit
Administration (MTA) is one of the largest multi-modal transit systems in the
United States. MTA operates Local and Commuter buses, Light Rail, Metro Subway,
Maryland Area Regional Commuter (MARC) Train service, and a comprehensive
Paratransit (Mobility) system. MTA also manages the Taxi Access system, and
directs funding and statewide assistance to Locally Operated Transit Systems
(LOTS) in each of Maryland's 23 counties, Annapolis, Baltimore City and Ocean
City. MDOT is a customer-driven leader that delivers safe, sustainable,
intelligent and exceptional transportation solutions in order to connect our
customers to life's opportunities. MTA's goal is to provide safe, efficient and
reliable transit across Maryland with world-class customer service.

 In case of any query regarding this article or other content please contact:
editorial@plusmediasolutions.com

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newswire


              Copyright 2017 Plus Media Solutions Private Limited
                              All Rights Reserved


                               21 of 27 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright (c) 2017 Fordham Law Review
                               Fordham Law Review

                                 November, 2017

                               Fordham Law Review

                             86 Fordham L. Rev. 633

LENGTH: 33661 words

ARTICLE: ALGORITHMIC JIM CROW

NAME: Margaret Hu*

BIO: * Associate Professor of Law, Washington and Lee University School of Law.
I would like to extend my deep gratitude to those who graciously offered
comments on this draft or who offered perspectives and expertise on this
research through our thoughtful discussions: Sahar Aziz, Jack Balkin, Kate
Bartlett, Gerlinde Berger-Walliser, Joseph Blocher, danah boyd, Devon Carbado,
Jennifer Chacon, Guy Charles, Andrew Christensen, Danielle Citron, Adam Cox,
Deven Desai, Mark Drumbl, Michelle Drumbl, Josh Fairfield, Frank Pasquale,
Jennifer Granick, Janine Hiller, Gordon Hull, Trina Jones, Stephen Lee, Charlton
McIlwain, Steve Miskinis, Hiroshi Motomura, Kish Parella, Jeff Powell, Angie
Raymond, Bertrall Ross, Victoria Sahani, Andrew Selbst, and Kevin Werbach. In
addition, this research benefited greatly from the discussions generated from
the Immigration Law Professors Workshop; the Law & Society Association Annual
Meeting; Yale Law School's Information Society Project's Unlocking the Black Box
Conference; the Privacy Law Scholars Conference; Data & Society Research
Institute's Eclectic Paper Workshop; Duke Law School's Culp Colloquium; Texas
A&M Faculty Workshop Series; UNC Charlotte Surveillance Colloquium; and the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Law & Ethics of Big Data
Colloquium. Many thanks to the editorial care of Vincent Margiotta of the
Fordham Law Review, and for the generous research assistance of Alexandra Klein,
Kirby Kreider, Bo Mahr, and Carroll Neale. All errors and omissions are my own.

TEXT:
 [*634]

   Introduction

   During the 2016 presidential campaign, then-candidate Donald J. Trump
announced his intention to impose a "Muslim Ban," which would prohibit Muslim
entry into the United States n1 as part of his counterterrorism strategy.
[*635]  Shortly before his election, Trump also announced a proposal for the
"extreme vetting" of immigrants and refugees. n2 Trump clarified that "the
Muslim ban is something that in some form has morphed into an extreme vetting
[protocol] from certain areas of the world." n3

   On January 27, 2017, during his first week as president, Trump signed
Executive Order 13,769, titled "Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist
Entry into the United States" (the "January 27, 2017, Order"). n4 Litigation
concerning the constitutionality of this Executive Order n5 focused on sections
3 and 5(c), provisions that relate to barring the entry of travelers and
refugees from specific Muslim-majority countries into the United States. n6
These controversial provisions were challenged as violating equal protection,
due process, and the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, among other
constitutional and statutory claims. n7

   On March 6, 2017, President Trump issued a revised Executive Order (the
"March 6 2017, Order"), Executive Order 13,780. Issued under the same title as
the January 27, 2017, Order, "Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry
into the United States," the March 6, 2017, Order superseded the  [*636]
January 27, 2017, Order. n8 However, it left the extreme vetting provisions of
the January 27, 2017, Order in place, n9 and, in fact, expanded the vetting
requirements in several respects. n10 The extreme vetting requirements of the
March 6, 2017, Order are now most fully articulated in section 5, titled
"Implementing Uniform Screening and Vetting Standards for All Immigration
Programs." n11

   The travel restrictions and the vetting requirements were expanded yet again
in a third iteration of the "Muslim Ban," also referred to as the "Travel Ban"
or the "Entry Ban." On September 24, 2017, shortly before oral argument was
scheduled for the U.S. Supreme Court on October 10, 2017, in the consolidated
Travel Ban cases of Trump v. Hawaii and Trump v. International Refugee
Assistance Project, n12 President Trump signed a new Proclamation (the
"September 24, 2017, Order"). n13 The September 24, 2017, Order is titled,
"Enhancing Vetting Capabilities and Processes for Detecting Attempted Entry into
the United States by Terrorists or Other Public-Safety Threats." n14 Thus, the
most recent Order, as implied by the title, focuses more squarely on the extreme
vetting provisions set forth by the prior Orders. More specifically, sections
1(a) through (h) of the September 24, 2017, Order focus on "identity-management
and information-sharing capabilities, protocols, and practices" related to
immigration screening and vetting. n15 The next day, the Court ordered briefing
as to whether the Travel Ban cases that had been scheduled for oral argument on
October 10, 2017, were moot. n16 At the time of publication, the litigation
remains ongoing, including challenges to the September 24, 2017, Order. n17

    [*637]  Regardless of the final disposition of these litigation matters, it
is significant to note that the extreme vetting provisions of the original and
revised Executive Orders have received less judicial attention than the travel
restrictions. n18 The extreme vetting provisions do not appear to be dependent
upon the authority of the Orders, and are presented in the Orders as an evolving
and prospective administrative matter. n19 Thus, the vetting provisions of the
March 6, 2017, Order and the September 24, 2017, Order may not be fully
challenged. n20

   This Article: focuses on the long-term impact of modern vetting requirements,
such as those prescribed in the Executive Orders referenced above, n21 and other
immigration-related screening protocols that are increasingly algorithmically
anchored. It contends that the implementation of expanded vetting protocols n22
risks implications that may be undertheorized due to an underappreciation of the
mass cybersurveillance and disparate-impact consequences that surround current
screening measures broadly promulgated by the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security (DHS). Specifically, this Article: advances the claim that DHS vetting
and screening  [*638]  protocols risk introducing an algorithmically driven and
technologically enhanced form of Jim Crow. n23

   Unlike the "separate but equal" n24 de jure discrimination n25 of a historic
Jim Crow regime, Algorithmic Jim Crow risks imposing both de jure and de facto
discrimination n26 through an "equal but separate" n27 regime. This Article:
explains how Algorithmic Jim Crow is an outgrowth of a digital era that  [*639]
exploits cybersurveillance n28 and dataveillance n29 systems that are rapidly
proliferating in both the public n30 and private sectors. n31

   This Article: demonstrates how immigration-related vetting and database
screening protocols utilize newly developed big data n32 screening, tracking,
and profiling tools that attempt to verify identity and assess future risk. n33
These tools are now actively deployed by DHS n34 and utilize databases  [*640]
operated by the military n35 and intelligence communities. n36 Currently,
vetting and screening protocols often begin with biometric identification n37 -
for example, the digital collection and screening of scanned fingerprints
through federal and state biometric databases in the United States and
international biometric databases, such as those operated by ICPO-INTERPOL
(Interpol). n38 Biometric data currently collected by DHS include scanned
fingerprints n39 and irises, n40 digital photos for facial recognition
technology, n41 and DNA. n42

   Consequently, implementation of extreme vetting protocols will likely include
proposals for a tamper-resistant and fraud-proof biometric electronic identity
card, n43 such as a biometric ePassport. n44 The Trump administration's
Executive Orders, for example, specifically mandate "Expedited Completion of the
Biometric Entry-Exit Tracking System" by DHS. n45 As part of new  [*641]
vetting protocols, DHS also seeks social media identification data n46 and plans
to seek social media user credentials, n47 such as passwords to Facebook
accounts of refugees and visa applicants. n48 Newly developed "big data"
cybersurveillance tools fuse biometric data with biographic data and internet
and social media profiling to assess risk. n49

   This Article: aims to explain how big data vetting is mistakenly presented as
a procedure that is restricted to noncitizens: immigrants, refugee and asylum
applicants, and visitors seeking a travel visa to the United States. Instead,
such vetting is part of a web of technologies that DHS has termed "identity
management." n50 The application of these technologies may eventually extend to
the entire citizenry through a variety of policy proposals, including a
biometric national identification system, and various mandatory vetting and
database screening programs. Identity-management programs attempt to
authenticate identity and assess the risk factors across entire populations,
including the U.S. citizenry. Big data vetting, thus, is misunderstood as a
protocol that is likely to be limited to immigration-related screening. More
accurately, such vetting includes an evolving form of big data surveillance that
attempts to assess criminal and terroristic risk across entire populations and
subpopulations through mass data collection, database screening and data fusion,
artificial intelligence, and algorithm-driven predictive analytics. n51

    [*642]  The long-term consequences of modern big data surveillance can be
better envisioned by anticipating how and why big data vetting protocols may be
extended to the entire population. Eventually, all residents of the United
States, both citizens and noncitizens, may face various stages of technological
vetting and algorithmic screening as a part of a post-September 11, 2001,
national security policy trajectory that embraces big data surveillance for its
presumed efficacy. Importantly, in parallel with the extreme vetting protocols
mandated by the Executive Orders, almost every immigration reform effort since
9/11 has called for biometric data collection from the entire citizenry in the
United States to enhance border security efforts. n52 At the same time,
increasing concern regarding homegrown terrorism has resulted in a call to
extend domestic surveillance and counterterrorism efforts to both citizens and
noncitizens. n53 The Snowden disclosures, for example, have further revealed how
foreign-intelligence-gathering tools, such as bulk metadata collection, can be
indiscriminate in scope and impact both citizens and noncitizens. n54

   Identifying the vetting procedures embedded within Executive Order 13,769 and
the constitutional challenges which followed its promulgation is particularly
appropriate as 2017 marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of
Executive Order 9066 by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. n55 That order,
issued on February 19, 1942, and titled "Authorizing the Secretary of War to
Prescribe Military Areas," allowed for Japanese internment by delegating to the
Secretary of War the authority "to take such other steps as he ... may deem
advisable to enforce compliance" with the exclusion of Japanese Americans and
those of Japanese ancestry. n56

   The legal challenges mounted against Executive Order 9066 culminated in
several U.S. Supreme Court cases, most notably, Korematsu v. United States. n57
In this case, decided in 1944, the Court upheld the constitutionality  [*643]
of Executive Order 9066, reasoning in part: "We are dealing specifically with
nothing but an exclusion order. To cast this case into outlines of racial
prejudice, without reference to the real military dangers which were presented,
merely confuses the issue." n58 Drawing comparisons between Executive Order
13,769 and Executive Order 9066, and reviewing the original justification for
Japanese internment, is critical here as President Trump and others have cited
both FDR's actions n59 and Korematsu as precedent for the Muslim Ban and the
development of a Muslim registry database. n60

   This Article: proceeds in four parts. Part I describes how modern vetting
procedures are intertwined with burgeoning identity-management systems. Based on
a review of publicly available information, these vetting protocols are
increasingly dependent upon the following: mass biometric data collection,
automated or semiautomated biometric identification, and algorithm-dependent
database screening programs. In a big data world, threat risk assessments and
data-profiling tools do not necessarily begin with the identification of
individuals on the basis of traditionally protected classifications, such as
race, ethnicity, or national origin. Instead, because contemporary big data
systems are data-classification oriented, vetting and screening protocols begin
with the identification of individuals on the basis of numerical identification,
such as passport numbers, and on the basis of biometric identification, such as
the cataloguing of scanned fingerprints and irises.

   Part II describes how national security programs risk creating forms of
discrimination similar to Jim Crow in that they are also based upon
classification and screening protocols. Historic Jim Crow regimes started with a
legal premise: that certain individuals could and should be classified on the
basis of race. Next, Jim Crow laws utilized screening systems to enforce
segregation based upon designated racial classification. This discussion
explores why security threat assessments produced through algorithms and
database screening may - similar to historic Jim Crow - also separate
populations based upon particular classifications. New Algorithmic Jim Crow
systems, like historic Jim Crow regimes, systems may present themselves as
facially neutral.

    [*644]  Part III explains how identity-management systems do not necessarily
discriminate based on protected categories recognized under equal protection
jurisprudence. n61 Rather, newly emerging vetting systems are often centered on
big data and generally driven by mass data collection and analysis. These
systems, for instance, purport to be race neutral and not to target individuals
based on a protected classification. Rather, it is often the case that results
of data screening and vetting analytics deemed suspect and anomalous are
isolated and targeted. Consequently, the "equal but separate" consequences of
Algorithmic Jim Crow will allow for the "equal" vetting and screening of all
citizens and noncitizens. At the same time, newly deployed vetting systems will
allow federal and state governments to "separate" individuals based upon the
vetting and screening actions mandated through security policy developments.

   Part IV further discusses why advocates of immigration federalism n62 and
national security federalism n63 - those seeking the expansion of state
participation in the enforcement of federal immigration and national security
law - have increasingly enacted biometric data harvesting and
identity-management laws that mimic federal laws and programs. These state laws
mandate the utilization of multiple dataveillance tools and biometric data
screening devices, purportedly to further crime and immigration control and
simultaneously support counterterrorism efforts. Yet, just as historic Jim Crow
regimes delegated segregationist gatekeeping duties to state and private
entities, contemporary immigration policy delegates restrictive immigration
gatekeeping duties to state and private entities. Under Algorithmic Jim  [*645]
Crow, these technologically enabled gatekeeping duties involve race-neutral
database screening of personally identifiable data and biometric data through
federal vetting and screening protocols. The results, however, may not be race
neutral, or may in fact have a disparate impact on traditionally protected
classes.

   Part IV further explains how technological vetting protocols and
algorithm-driven database screening systems may be insulated from successful
legal challenges, as the law has not yet adapted to anticipate new forms of
back-end discrimination facilitated by DHS's rapid deployment of
identity-management programs. The government, as in Korematsu, will likely
defend any disparate-impact consequences as necessary and justified based upon
threat risk assessments and nonracial classifications. Risk-based
classifications and data characteristics deemed suspect fall outside of the
protections recognized by current equal protection jurisprudence. This type of
disparate impact, driven by database screening and technologically enhanced
discrimination, may face limited or lenient review by a federal judiciary that
generally grants broad deference to the government in matters of immigration and
national security. n64 Thus, the advent of Algorithmic Jim Crow will require an
evolution of equality law.

   This Article: concludes that current algorithm-driven vetting and
biometric-biographic identification screening, especially once deployed across
the entire citizenry, will likely lead to discriminatory profiling and
surveillance on the basis of suspicious data as well as classification-based
discrimination. These vetting and screening systems are likely to result in both
direct and disparate discrimination, particularly based on race, color,
ethnicity, national origin, and religion. In addition, recent
immigration-control policy and programs demonstrate the government's interest in
delegating immigration-vetting duties to private actors, such as employers, and
nonfederal actors, such as state and local law enforcement, which can exacerbate
issues of racial profiling and discrimination.

   I. Birth of Algorithmic Jim Crow

 When President Trump signed Executive Order 13,769 on January 27, 2017,
then-acting Attorney General Sally Yates was taken by surprise. n65 Yates
reviewed the Order as well as a number of briefs by individuals who sought to
enjoin the Order in federal court and believed that it raised constitutional
problems - namely Establishment Clause and due process concerns. n66 Yates later
explained to the New Yorker that, after reviewing  [*646]  arguments for and
against the first Order, she thought that her two choices were either to resign
or to refuse to defend the Order. n67 After reviewing the evidence, Yates
believed that the Order was ultimately based on religion and said, "I thought
back to Jim Crow laws, or literacy tests. Those didn't say that the purpose was
to prevent African-Americans from voting. But that's what the purpose was." n68
Yates drafted a letter to her colleagues at the U.S. Department of Justice, in
which she stated: "At present, I am not convinced that the defense of the
Executive Order is consistent with these responsibilities nor am I convinced
that the Executive Order is lawful." n69 Yates directed Department of Justice
attorneys not to defend the Order until she determined that it was appropriate
to act. n70 A few hours later, Yates received a letter from the White House that
informed her that she had been fired. n71

   Yates's invocation of Jim Crow deserves notice. The former acting Attorney
General concluded that the Executive Order might lead to a disparate impact on
the basis of protected classifications such as national origin and religion. At
the same time, she also recognized that the Executive Order presented itself as
facially neutral, much like the facially neutral literacy tests promulgated
under Jim Crow laws that disproportionately burdened the voting rights of
minority communities.

   Under historic Jim Crow, literacy tests, poll taxes, and other obstacles to
voting rights were equally applied to all voters. n72 Although these obstacles
did not explicitly inquire into voters' race, they nonetheless significantly
disenfranchised minority communities. Therefore, they served discriminatory ends
even though the race of the voter was never technically a basis for denying
access to the ballot. n73

   Much like literacy tests and poll taxes, post-9/11 security initiatives may
disproportionately impact minority communities even though they do not
explicitly effectuate decisions based on protected attributes. An inquiry into
modern-day screening and vetting systems depends upon in an understanding of
myriad post-9/11 national security programs and policy initiatives. Contemporary
screening and vetting systems utilize algorithms to determine a wide range of
questions, including identity and associational assessments, to gauge risk. For
example, extreme vetting systems like the one promulgated by the Executive
Orders may bring about disproportionate  [*647]  burdens on minority
communities. Potential discrimination facilitated or exacerbated by
technological means appearing to be facially neutral may evade legal challenge
requiring careful inquiry.

   Because big data screening and tracking systems unfold in ways that are
difficult to see - for example, through algorithm-driven determinations,
internet-based database screening programs, and social media monitoring - it is
critical to explore how modern vetting protocols may be linked to preexisting
post-9/11 identity-management systems that are dependent upon cybersurveillance
and dataveillance tools. To grasp how extreme vetting can be extended to the
entire citizenry, it is helpful to compare No Fly database screening systems
with potential extreme vetting database screening systems. For example, based on
what is known of both programs, it appears that many of the database screening
protocols overlap. n74 Part I, therefore, explains how vetting systems will
increasingly rely upon database screening, including universal biometric
databases, to sweep entire populations and subsets within populations to assess
terroristic and criminal risk.

   To better understand the Trump administration's policy on extreme vetting, it
is important to reconstruct the justification for such a policy based upon
historical background and prior policy developments implemented during the Obama
administration. Many of the policies advanced by the Executive Order are not
only an outgrowth of 9/11, but they are specifically reactive to the Paris
attacks in November 2015 and the San Bernardino attack in December 2015. Both
terrorist events led to multiple immigration policy proposals and adjustments to
current vetting procedures.

   On the evening of November 13, 2015, coordinated terrorist attacks were
staged in Paris, France, which included mass shootings, suicide bombings, and
hostage takings. n75 According to news reports, the terrorist attacks left 129
dead and 352 wounded, including ninety-nine in serious condition. n76 The
terrorist group Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) immediately claimed
responsibility. n77

   According to news accounts, ISIS announced immediately after the Paris
attacks that three teams of eight terrorists had carried them out. n78 Seven of
the terrorists were reportedly killed through self-detonated suicide bombs. n79
In the days following the attacks, intelligence reports indicated that at least
[*648]  three of the eight terrorists had used falsified passports. n80 A
passport found on the body of a terrorist who had died at the Stade de France
("National Stadium") was reported to be an illegitimate Syrian passport and it
was reported that the terrorist had allegedly claimed Syrian refugee status in
France. n81 Two other terrorists killed at the National Stadium allegedly
carried false Turkish passports. n82 By November 19, 2015, just six days after
the attacks, the governors of thirty-one states had announced their refusal to
admit or resettle Syrian refugees in their respective states. n83

   One week after the Paris attacks, Michael Ignatieff, formerly the Edward R.
Murrow professor of public policy at the Harvard Kennedy School and currently
the rector and president of Central European University in Budapest, expressed a
position widely held by many experts: an international biometric identification
system would help to address the refugee crisis in Europe and simultaneously
serve national security interests. n84 He stated that "the world badly needs a
new migratory regime - based around an internationally authorized biometric ID
card, with a date of permitted entry and a mandatory exit." n85 On November 24,
2015, while standing next to then-President Francois Hollande of France less
than two weeks after the Paris attacks, then-President Barack Obama announced
that "the [U.S.] government was developing "biometric information and other
technologies that can make [refugee identification] more accurate.'" n86

   On December 2, 2015, fourteen people were killed and twenty-one were
seriously injured in a terrorist attack in San Bernardino, California. n87 The
attack consisted of a mass shooting and an attempted bombing. n88 The
perpetrators, Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik, a married couple residing
in California, targeted a San Bernardino County Department of  [*649]  Public
Health holiday party. n89 Farook, a Pakistani American U.S. citizen born in
Illinois, was employed by the Department of Public Health. n90 Malik was a
Pakistani-born lawful permanent resident who had recently migrated to the United
States. n91 According to media accounts, the Muslim couple had been
self-radicalized, inspired by ISIS. n92

   On the same day as the San Bernardino attack, Paul Ryan, Speaker of the U.S.
House of Representatives, explained that lawmakers were considering various
legislative reforms to increase security vetting of refugees and immigrants in
response to the threat of ISIS, including requiring countries "to issue smart
e-passports with biometric chips." n93

   Less than one week later, in the immediate aftermath of the Paris and San
Bernardino attacks, then-presidential candidate Trump called for what has been
referred to as a "Muslim Ban" or "Travel Ban": an executive action that would
prohibit entry of any Muslim into the United States. n94 Trump did not provide
specifics on how he would prohibit Muslims from entering the United States;
however, he later clarified that the ban would be temporary to allow the
government to assess its current immigration procedures and "suspend immigration
from regions linked with terrorism." n95 Trump's call for a "Muslim Ban" was
followed by calls for surveillance of Muslim communities and mosques. n96

   Six months later, on June 12, 2016, Omar Mateen, an Afghani American born in
the United States, killed forty-nine people and wounded fifty-three in a
shooting rampage at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida. n97 According to
news reports, Mateen had proclaimed allegiance to ISIS shortly before committing
"the worst mass shooting in United States history." n98 In the wake of the
Orlando attack, then-candidate Trump explained that the profiling of Muslims in
the United States was necessary as a preemptive measure to prevent future
attacks. n99

    [*650]  On August 16, 2016, Trump announced a proposal for the "extreme
vetting" of immigrants and refugees in a campaign speech on ISIS. n100 He
explained: "In the Cold War, we had an ideological screening test. The time is
long overdue to develop a new screening test for the threats we face today. I
call it extreme vetting. I call it extreme, extreme vetting." n101 Then, on
August 31, 2016, Trump delivered an address on his proposed immigration policy.
n102 In addition to his promise to build a wall on the southern border of the
United States and his reassertion that "Mexico will pay for the wall," Trump
explained that he would also implement a "biometric entry-exit system for
tracking visa-holders." n103 These promises of enhanced national security and
border security systems, as well as the various Executive Orders restricting
travel, inherently represent technological developments in the promulgation of
emerging cybersurveillance technologies and algorithmic-driven screening and
vetting protocols. To draw parallels between historic Jim Crow and Algorithmic
Jim Crow, this Article: turns to an overview of Jim Crow.

   II. Overview of Jim Crow: Classification and Screening Systems

 Artificial intelligence and algorithms are not usually perceived as resulting
in discrimination. In fact, they may appear to be equality-compliant or even
equality-enhancing in that algorithmic screening and vetting can be applied
equally across entire populations and subpopulations. Screening and
classification systems, however, even when facially neutral and algorithmically
based, can lead to profound constitutional challenges. The historical framing in
this section is necessary to assist in the interrogation of new classification
and screening systems that are flourishing under security rationales and
presented as technologically objective and colorblind.

   Therefore, to better grasp why the framing of Algorithmic Jim Crow is now
needed, Part II lays a factual predicate to explain the foundational legal
premises for historic Jim Crow regimes. Traditional Jim Crow laws first required
the government - often state and county governments - to engage in formal and
standardized protocols to assign racial classification to citizens of that state
or county. Once a racial classification system was determined under the law,
screening protocols, also established under Jim Crow laws, enabled the
separation of populations on the basis of that racial classification.
Consequently, understanding the basic mechanics of how separation was enforced
under the law begins with an understanding of historic Jim Crow classification
and screening systems.

[*651]

   A. Historical Framing of Jim Crow

 This overview is not intended to be an exhaustive history of the legal issues
and the nature of Jim Crow - other scholarship has addressed that subject in
thoughtful detail. n104 Instead, this background intends to sketch out an
understanding of the scope and context of the Jim Crow era and to further
clarify that its laws and policies were not confined merely to segregating
locational sites and imposing restrictions on movement. Rather, Jim Crow was:



   [A] structure of exclusion and discrimination devised by white Americans to
be employed principally against black Americans ... . Its central purpose was to
maintain a second-class social and economic status for blacks while upholding a
first-class social and economic status for whites... . In the South, Jim Crow
discrimination at its height existed not only by statute but by custom and
racial "etiquette,' and it was rigidly enforced by both the law enforcement
agencies and courts as well as by ordinary white citizens who were neither
policemen nor judges but who often took the law into their own hands as though
they were. n105

  [*652]  One scholar explains that Jim Crow is a term for "a series [of] laws
and ordinances passed by Southern states and municipalities between 1877 and
1965 legalizing segregation (the physical separation of individuals based on
race, gender, religion, or class) within their boundaries." n106 Although racial
discrimination was not a solely Southern practice - African Americans in
Northern states experienced discrimination in housing, education, employment,
and economic settings n107 - in the South, racial restrictions were omnipresent
and ingrained in Southern life. n108 One historian argues that Jim Crow "was a
Southern phenomenon, the infrastructure white Southerners built to preserve,
insofar as humanly possible, the old master/slave system." n109

   Jim Crow penetrated every facet of life for Southern African Americans: it
was an integral part of the social, political, and legal fabric of Southern
society. n110 Jim Crow established restrictions on marriage, n111 voting, n112
[*653]  education, n113 employment, n114 housing, n115 travel, n116 and enforced
segregation in public spaces. n117 Some of these restrictions were codified in
law, and others were ingrained as a matter of social behavior and custom. n118
Jim Crow "stood for an entire culture based on violence, racism, and fear that
affected the life of every African American living in the South." n119 Despite
the passage of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments, Supreme
Court precedent in the wake of those amendments upheld laws that enforced racial
inequality through segregation laws, or laws that created a disproportionately
discriminatory impact on African Americans. n120

   Racial classification was an integral part of Jim Crow. n121 The majority of
the Southern states legalized racial classification by codifying the "one-drop"
rule or enshrining it as part of their state constitutions: any modicum of black
ancestry meant that the individual in question was not white, and thus subject
[*654]  to Jim Crow laws. n122 Definitions of race were also included in
antimiscegenation laws, which prohibited interracial marriage. n123 Virginia,
for example, adopted a law that required racial descriptions to be recorded at a
child's birth to further classify individuals as "white" or "colored." n124
Virginia's Racial Integrity Act of 1924 n125 "required all citizens within the
state born after June 14, 1912 to register their racial composition with the
Bureau of Vital Statistics," n126 prohibited interracial marriages, and defined
who exactly qualified as "white." n127 A copy of an old birth record form
provided by the Library of Virginia describes the definition of "white" under
Virginia law: "A white person is one with no trace whatever of blood of another
race, except that one with one-sixteenth of the blood of American Indian,
unmixed with other race, may be classed as white." n128

   Thus, the Jim Crow system depended on initial classification and markers of
racial identity to determine who would be subjected to laws that designated
individual treatment, rights, and privileges based on those classifications.
n129

   B. Classification and Screening

 Classification of identity, such as the race-based types that occurred during
the Jim Crow era, is an essential step in establishing exclusionary systems.
n130  [*655]  Exclusion involves separating out individuals from a group or one
group from another category. It is not possible to exclude a group from a system
of rights and privileges without first determining criteria for exclusion. n131
Therefore, classification is necessary for these systems' operation. n132 During
the Jim Crow era, these classifications took the form of "one-drop" laws, or
legal decisions that identified who was "colored" and who was not. n133 Other
exclusionary systems have engaged in similar forms of classification. For
example, Apartheid in South Africa relied on national identity cards that
identified individuals by racial groups. n134 During the Belgian colonial period
in Rwanda, officials mandated "Hutu" and "Tutsi" markers on identity cards in a
system that privileged Tutsi individuals and ultimately laid the groundwork for
the 1994 genocide. n135 In Nazi Germany, the Nuremburg laws determined who was
Jewish and thus subject to exclusion, discrimination, and persecution. n136

   Classification alone, however, is not sufficient to operate an exclusionary
system. Implementing such a system requires screening: determining whether
individuals who have been classified are complying with the rules that accompany
such classification or whether the individuals are somehow "suspect." Under Jim
Crow, for example, screening was both official - such as official segregation
policy enforcement - and unofficial, as a part of social  [*656]  and behavioral
norms. n137 Jim Crow-era screening was a "small data" world screening system,
relying first on classification on paper documents, such as birth certificates
or identity cards, or an examination of physical appearance, n138 followed by
screening to ensure that the excluded individuals complied with the systems of
classification. n139 In a big data world, systems of screening, such as the
extreme vetting requirements of Trump's Executive Orders, are capable of
surveilling vast numbers of individuals based on data or other broad categories
and then subsequently classifying them based on status. n140 Essentially,
screening is now theoretically "equal" and the classification system is
"separate."

   Failing to examine the underlying bases of classification and screening
systems indicates an inherent level of trust in government systems that
ultimately may lead to harmful consequences. n141 Screening in a big data world
serves as a form of technological interrogation and entrenches surveillance as a
norm. n142 Mass screenings of citizens in "collect it all" systems embed the
structure of policing into the state in much the same way that Jim Crow embedded
racial classifications and screenings of individuals based on race or perceived
race. n143 Big data systems seek suspicious data as a means of identifying and
classifying suspicious persons. n144 Broad population-based screening and mass
surveillance promote fundamentally undemocratic surveillance norms. n145 As
Justice Sotomayor explained in her  [*657]  dissenting opinion in Utah v.
Strieff, n146 random, suspicionless identity verifications by law enforcement on
the street are inherently undemocratic:



   This case tells everyone, white and black, guilty and innocent, that an
officer can verify your legal status at any time. It says that your body is
subject to invasion while courts excuse the violation of your rights. It implies
that you are not a citizen of a democracy, but the subject of a carceral state,
just waiting to be cataloged. n147

 Further, some screening protocols may rely on rationales that are facially
neutral but ultimately based on impermissible classifications. In his concurring
opinion in International Refugee Assistance Project v. Trump, n148 Judge James
Wynn pointed out that discrimination, even when "shrouded in layers of
legality[,] is no less an insult to our Constitution than naked invidious
discrimination." n149 Judge Wynn cited Dred Scott v. Sandford n150 and Korematsu
v. United States n151 as examples of judicial failures in response to
exclusionary and discriminatory systems cloaked in legality. n152 In the
majority opinion, the Fourth Circuit concluded that the plaintiffs had
sufficiently alleged that nationality served as a proxy for religious
discrimination n153 and was a crude and ineffective measure for determining
whether a threat existed. n154 Indeed, in her decision to refuse to defend the
first Executive Order, then-acting Attorney General Sally Yates considered that
it bore a resemblance to Jim Crow laws. n155

   Thus, systems of subordination, such as Jim Crow and Apartheid, depend on
classifying who is privileged and who is not. As discussed above, once a
classification is emplaced, laws can require separation, subordination, and
screening on the basis of that classification. Jim Crow regimes used race-based
classifications to engage in a broad range of economic, social, and political
exclusions under the law. n156 The act of excluding or disenfranchising on the
basis of race often required legally mandated  [*658]  screening processes n157
as well as screening through social norms and behavior control. n158 These
screening processes would often require governments or their private delegates
to screen individuals on the basis of race, and any failure to do so would often
carry legal consequences as well as social penalties such as ostracization. n159

   C. Cyberarchitecture of Algorithmic Jim Crow

 Perhaps the easiest way to understand how the Jim Crow regime is being
replicated in a big data world through Algorithmic Jim Crow is to consider the
following scenario: imagine substituting race-based classifications with
classifications of digitally derived suspiciousness. Rather than relying upon a
targeted class, such as race, national origin, gender, or religion, as a sole
basis for exclusion, big data allows for exclusion to be based on an
abstraction, such as digitally inferred or algorithmically anchored guilt or
suspicion. n160 In addition, big data can aggregate protected classifications
with other collected data. n161 For example, biometric screening that uses soft
biometric indicators, such as digital assessments of skin color and estimated
age extracted from a digital photo, can combine race data proxies with other
proxy variables to predict criminal or terroristic behavior (e.g., aggregating
passport number and digital photo with data analysis of web browsing activity
and social media presence). n162 In addition, there are multiple components to
extreme vetting, including, but not limited to, biometric identification, n163
record linkage, n164 information extraction, n165 and predictive analytics. n166
In some circumstances, these technologies allow for classification and then
screening. In other circumstances, these technologies allow for just the
opposite: screening, then classification.

   What is difficult to understand is how machine learning and artificial
intelligence can replace human judgment in the classification and screening
processes of Algorithmic Jim Crow regimes. In a small data world, Jim Crow
required a human to physically inspect the skin color of an individual to
determine the race of that individual (e.g., a physician attesting to the race
of an individual on a birth certificate). n167 In the small data world,
screening  [*659]  processes also required human judgment (e.g., a county clerk
inspecting birth certificates before issuing marriage licenses and marriage
certificates to determine compliance with antimiscegenation laws). n168

   In contrast, human involvement is not required to classify individuals in a
big data world. An individual can be classified as a potential criminal,
terrorist, or threat risk based on digital data alone and digitized analysis
such as algorithmic screening. Algorithmic tools can analyze data to establish
identity (e.g., a record-locator matching algorithm such as database screening
systems that match names with passport numbers and other databases of personally
identifiable information) and screen for suspicious digital profiles (e.g.,
combine passport information with stored data and real time data). n169 Stored
data might include bulk telephony metadata n170 - databases that collect time,
duration, and geolocation of calls - and other government records and private
data, such as consumer activities. n171 Real-time analytics can include
situational awareness systems that attempt to analyze real-time video
surveillance feeds that connect the monitored individual through facial
recognition technology to that individual's social media. n172

   Hence, the nature of classification and screening capacities are radically
different in a big data world. Classification, therefore, can be based in part
or in whole on artificial intelligence. Similarly, screening in a big data world
does not rely on human processes. The No Fly List, for example, can be generated
through database screening and digital watchlisting systems rather than human
nomination. n173 Thus, in a big data world, classification and screening
protocols can be combined, digitized, and automated. As a result, these big data
classification and screening systems may be nearly impossible for a citizen to
interrogate or challenge. n174

   What is similar between big data and small data exclusionary regimes is that
separation and segregation is at the heart of the processes. What appears
[*660]  to be - at the earliest stages of the big data governance phenomenon -
purely national security motivated protocols, such as the No Fly List, might not
appear to be a part of a larger segregationist regime. At the earliest stages of
Jim Crow, separation of the races was deemed necessary by the Court in Plessy v.
Ferguson n175 under security rationales to avoid race-based conflict. n176 At
the earliest stages of Algorithmic Jim Crow, isolating individuals based on data
suspicions is also justified under security rationales - to prevent terrorism.

   Unlike historic Jim Crow, established to continue a racial hierarchy first
instituted through slavery, big data regimes do not overtly seek to create
subordinate social classes. But that may well be the result. Like under historic
Jim Crow regimes, security needs are professed as justification. Even if we are
not yet faced with a mature Algorithmic Jim Crow regime, it is important to
recognize that Jim Crow laws took decades to develop into a pervasive legal
system. n177 With the benefit of hindsight, we now examine the full arc of Jim
Crow, including the opportunity to revisit the legal precedent that allowed for
segregation to take root and become normalized. n178 Jim Crow did not commence
with the segregation of every water fountain, swimming pool, bus, train, movie
theater, hotel, or restaurant. n179 Jim Crow did, however, eventually convert
nearly every citizen into a race classification expert and screening specialist
to comply with the laws. n180 Jim Crow laws imposed a duty under law or social
norms upon many entities - public, private, and individual citizens - to
classify and screen. n181

   How will classification and screening under Algorithmic Jim Crow, like
historic Jim Crow, require classification and screening requirements under the
law? How will Algorithmic Jim Crow impose a legal duty upon public, private, and
individual citizens to classify and screen? Jim Crow laws mandated paper-based
classifications such as attestation to racial classifications on birth
certificates. n182 Big data technologies, however, do not require discrete
screening or classification procedures because of the nature of modern data
tools. Instead of separate processes that treat screening and classification as
separate, big data tools have the capacity to execute both simultaneously.

   In a small data world, linearity was more common between classification and
screening: the former had to follow the latter as a matter of logic. Without
racial classification, racial screening would not have been possible. Once an
individual had been classified as white, privileges under Jim Crow logically
followed that racial status. With big data, assessments can be made  [*661]
concurrently and, thus, consecutive processes are not necessary but may occur.
Under big data theories of identity management, an aggregation of data can, for
instance, map identity - such as classification of potential terrorist status.
In addition, the same vetting and screening protocols facilitate determinations
as to access (e.g., whether an individual can board a plane or enter the
country). It is the accumulation and analysis of the ever-growing aggregation of
data that makes possible the database screening and algorithmic decision-making
that is at the core of the extreme vetting enterprise.

   New classification and screening technologies thus eliminate or reduce the
need to conduct human-based screening. Historic Jim Crow laws required bus
drivers to segregate passengers on the basis of race, a screening protocol that
required human judgment and human action. n183 Contemporary systems may use a
combination of automated screening and human screening, such as TSA screeners
relying upon the predictive analytic systems of the No Fly List. n184
Algorithmic Jim Crow may also facilitate fully automated and digitized screening
systems. n185

   Under contemporary forms of big data governance, classification will likely
comprise a combination of traditional characteristics such as well-recognized
protected classifications (e.g., race, national origin, gender, and age) as well
as nonprotected attributes (e.g., data deemed suspicious, unstable or anomalous
digital data, and database screening and algorithmically derived results) that
allow for inferences of guilt. But instead of impermissibly distributing or
withholding privileges based on protected classifications, big data will simply
incorporate them as part of a "risk assessment." Such threat risk assessments
will attempt to predict criminal or terroristic predisposition. n186 Unlike
historic Jim Crow, Algorithmic Jim Crow may not require classification in order
to conduct screening. Because of the vast amounts of digital data that can be
analyzed for both classification and screening purposes, data will, at times, be
collected and sorted for classification to screen. n187 At other times, data
will be collected and screened  [*662]  to determine a classification. Thus, big
data governance facilitates screening and classification, or classification and
screening, through big data systems such as database screening, digital
watchlisting, and security analytics.

   Extreme vetting, as proposed in the March 6, 2017, Order and the September
24, 2017, Order - and as promulgated by other immigrant screening systems - is
used in this Article: as a mere example for how Algorithmic Jim Crow regimes can
potentially burrow into national security policy-making. Directives such as the
presidential Executive Order n188 can create classification and screening
systems under law, regulation, and policy. n189 To understand how, it is
important to dissect the manner in which extreme vetting and other DHS
algorithmically driven programs are likely to classify and screen citizens and
noncitizens.

   Yet, a full explanation of how algorithmic classification and screening
systems work, and the problems presented by big data and predictive analytics,
is beyond the scope of this Article: . n190 There has been much important work
and attention addressing the broader topic, as well as the issue of
discrimination resulting from the use of these emerging technologies. n191
Predictive analytics make actionable or useful information from data by using
algorithms and other machine-learning techniques. n192  [*663]  While algorithms
and other machine-learning technologies can make meaningful connections from
large sets of data that are outside any human capabilities, researchers and
experts are increasingly noting their limitations: artificial intelligence
systems are not immune to inherent racial biases, and thus judgments derived
from algorithms may also be suspect. n193

   III. Theoretical Equality Under Algorithmic Jim Crow

 Part III explores how modern vetting protocol is properly understood as part of
a web of identity-management technologies that may extend to the entire
citizenry. For example, although extreme vetting is presented as a procedure
that is restricted to refugees, immigrants, and foreign visitors seeking a
travel visa to the United States, this characterization is misleading. Extreme
vetting is better grasped as a function of database screening and digital
watchlisting systems that can be applied equally to all citizens and noncitizens
under a wide range of contexts, often justified by national and homeland
security policy rationales.

   A. Limitations of Equal Protection as a Legal Response to Algorithmic Jim
Crow

 Before they are allowed to fly, work, drive, or vote, citizens and noncitizens
alike can now be subjected to mass data collection and automated or
semiautomated database screening protocols. n194 Increasingly, in the name of
national and homeland security, post-9/11 big data programs implemented by the
government allow for core rights and freedoms to be partially obstructed in some
instances or altogether blocked in others. n195 Moreover, because of the
"virtual" nature of mass data collection and database screening and the
classified nature of certain programs, the digital mediation and potential
interference of liberty interests can occur without our knowledge or consent.
n196

   As the national population is increasingly represented in the growing
databases and becomes subject to potential across-the-board vetting and
screening, claims of equal protection violations may collapse. This  [*664]
likelihood increases as defenders of database screening argue such screening
minimizes the role of the human element and thus minimizes the risk of racial
profiling on a theoretical level. Because the algorithms of any given big data
vetting or database screening system will not be transparent to those subject to
screening, the denial of a benefit or privilege, or consequences such as
detainment and deportation, will be without apparent cause beyond the fact that
the database has determined that they should be targeted. n197

   Thus, Algorithmic Jim Crow demonstrates how Jim Crow regimes can adapt and
evolve through use of modern technology. In Michelle Alexander's seminal work,
The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness, n198 the
story of Jim Crow has transformed from one of mass segregation and
disenfranchisement regimes in the post-Reconstruction era into mass
incarceration regimes in the post-War on Drugs n199 and the era of mandatory
minimum sentencing guidelines. n200 Alexander posits that Jim Crow should be
evaluated as a constantly evolving process, not a historical artifact. n201
Redressing new forms of Jim Crow requires observing innovations in law and
policy that result in the entrenchment of inequities on the basis of race and
other sites of historic discrimination. n202 As such, Alexander warns that
vigilance is needed to bear witness to an evolutionary process of law and policy
that can lead to new caste systems. n203 This is especially true in a modern era
that may present the mechanism for the caste as colorblind, n204 and involve
data tracking and digital sorting methods that may present a "virtual" cage
problem. n205

   Taking a cue from Alexander to refuse to limit Jim Crow to regimes designed
to subordinate a single race or class of individuals, we may see the newest
emergence of Jim Crow in mass surveillance and algorithm-driven decision-making.
Database screening and digital watchlisting systems, in fact, can serve as
complementary and facially colorblind supplements to mass incarceration systems.
n206 The purported colorblindness of mandatory sentencing and mass incarceration
systems, for instance, parallels the  [*665]  purported colorblindness of
mandatory database screening and vetting systems.

   As Reva Siegel has theorized, anticlassification jurisprudence cannot achieve
the same aims as antisubordination or antibalkinization jurisprudence. n207 In
contemporary equality cases considered before the Supreme Court, Siegel
observes: "The Justices who vote against affirmative action and other
race-conscious civil rights policies are said to reason from a colorblind
anticlassification principle, premised on the belief that the Constitution
protects individuals, not groups, and so bars all racial classifications, except
as a remedy for specific wrongdoing." n208 This judicial predisposition to
overturn programs that redress wrongs for suspect classifications - even when
the clear purpose of such programs is to assist those historically harmed by
such classifications - means that vetting and screening protocols that do not
overtly target such suspect classifications will not present an equal protection
problem. In other words, if the "anticlassification principle" continues to
dominate equal protection jurisprudence, "race-neutral" and equally applied
database screening and digital watchlisting systems will not appear to be
inconsistent with the anticlassification premise of equality law. Therefore,
such programs may pass equal protection muster, even if they impose disparate
consequences. n209

   Similarly, Jack Balkin provocatively asserts that the law of equality is
often, in fact, the law of inequality. n210 Balkin argues that, historically and
paradoxically, the law of equality has been adaptive to enforce inequality. n211
Balkin explains that the Supreme Court in Plessy v. Ferguson acknowledged that a
multitude of social and economic inequities arise on the basis of race. n212
Nonetheless, Plessy ratified racial segregation after finding no equal
protection defect with Jim Crow institutions. n213 The Court concluded that
[*666]  the "separate but equal" principle upheld the equality guarantees
required under the Equal Protection Clause so long as the government provided a
form of theoretical equality on the back end of segregation. n214 According to
Plessy, the separation of the races on the front end of state laws did not
create a violation of the Equal Protection Clause because the discrimination
could be redressed on the back end. n215 The Plessy Court further concluded that
racial separation on the front end could serve important law-and-order goals,
such as increasing a state's interest in ensuring safety and social order among
the different races. n216

   This legal reasoning is now widely discredited and, as noted, the Court now
has an antidiscrimination approach that strictly scrutinizes laws that operate
along such suspect classifications. n217 Nevertheless, that approach too is
viewed as inadequate by constitutional law experts and as hindering efforts to
address unequal realities. In contrast to the theoretical equality guarantees
assured on the back end of sorting methods instituted under historic Jim Crow
regimes, at the dawn of the big data revolution we may be witnessing more and
more legal contexts in which all are equally subject to digitalized vetting and
database screening protocols but with results on the back end that raise equal
protection concerns. Equality law that demands that the government provide equal
treatment under the law on a theoretical level on the front end therefore
prohibits traditional Jim Crow institutions. But Siegel, Balkin, and others
caution that equality law cannot stop at a judicial inquiry that ensures
colorblindness on the front end since that risks turning a blind eye to the
disparate impacts that can result on the back end. n218

   As the government continues to acquire more big data tools to serve
governance goals, such as database screening systems and predictive analytics
that assess risk, equality law may find no constitutional problem with
replication in reverse form of the social inequality permitted under the
"separate but equal" principle. Under an emerging technologically enhanced Jim
Crow regime, mass surveillance and semiautomated or automated algorithmic
sorting methods will appear to be equally applied across entire populations. The
colorblind and anticlassification premises of vetting and screening systems will
comport with an "equal but separate" principle. These systems, however, will
potentially offer only theoretical equality on the front end of newly emerging
data surveillance and data-sorting methods. Meanwhile, any disparate impacts on
the back end will be hard to challenge judicially because algorithmic
decision-making can occur in ways that are difficult to document.

    [*667]  The evolution of constitutional protections is, thus, critically
necessary in what Balkin and Sanford Levinson term the "National Surveillance
State." n219 In the National Surveillance State, the integration of
bureaucratized and normalized data collection and Information Society
surveillance technologies into day-to-day governance should be understood as a
distinctive concern of American constitutionalism: "One of the most important
developments in American constitutionalism is the gradual transformation of the
United States into a National Surveillance State." n220 Constitutional
protections that once were taken for granted in a small data world have proven
robust in theory but lacking in practical application. n221 Often, it is not so
much that our physical personhood is threatened in the National Surveillance
State, but as Daniel Solove describes it, it is our "digital person" that has
been placed at risk. n222

   The shift to the National Surveillance State and big data governance should
be understood as paradigmatic. Big data and algorithmic intelligence
technologies are disruptive and transformative in nature. n223 Defined by their
predictive and correlative capacities, big data technologies are capable of
facilitating a new type of knowledge that some argue is akin to virtual reality
(e.g., probabilistic or algorithmic holograms). n224

   Thus, big data surveillance that transforms into normalized day-to-day
governance practices often poses harms that are more virtual than physical - for
instance, digitally derived suspicion harms rather than detention harms. n225 As
a result, big data-driven predictive-policing methods are void of reasonable
suspicion as once defined in a small data world. n226 For example, while in a
small data world, reasonable suspicion is based on specific facts or inferences
regarding a specific individual's involvement in criminal activity. In a big
data world, on the other hand, targeting of suspects can proceed based on data
that is associated with them as collected in a database  [*668]  and that fit
particular profiles targeted by database searches. Small data discrimination,
consequently, can evolve into a form of big data discrimination in a myriad of
ways. For example, statistical guilt or correlative evidence that support
inferences of suspicion can be assigned through "race-neutral" tools that screen
entire populations "equally."

   B. No Fly List and Discrimination on the Back End of Vetting and Database
Screening Protocols

 To further understand how Algorithmic Jim Crow works in practice in
across-the-board vetting, this Part examines the No Fly List, the birth of a
"precrime" n227 vetting system that screens citizens and noncitizens in a
purportedly equal manner on the front end. De facto discrimination, for
instance, has been alleged in the disparate impact of the No Fly List, a system
that has been referred to as a "Flying While Muslim" program. n228

   Although discrimination may not occur on the front end of the vetting and
screening process of the No Fly List, plaintiffs challenging the No Fly List
allege that the program results in disparate consequences that
disproportionately impact those populations associated with terrorism, such as
military-age Muslim males n229 or Muslims who may be swept into the No Fly List
database screening systems by virtue of intensified surveillance of Muslim
communities by the intelligence community. n230 Examining the No Fly List
litigation shows that, in the absence of discrimination in front-end enforcement
techniques, back-end discrimination can emerge from the supposedly neutral
analytics of the digital watchlisting and database screening system itself.

   The No Fly List as well as other vetting and screening systems have already
faced multiple legal challenges. Federal courts have been asked to address the
new types of harms presented by digital watchlisting and database screening in
the National Surveillance State. n231 Of the challenges to multiple
identity-management technologies that have reached the Supreme Court, none have
allowed for an equal protection claim. As Cass Sunstein explains, "the Equal
Protection Clause is directed at the legality of classifications. When a
classification is challenged, the first question is whether it is drawn on the
basis of race or some other characteristic thought to call for  [*669]
"heightened' scrutiny." n232 If there is an impermissible classification, that
statute must survive the appropriate level of scrutiny. If there is no
classification, Sunstein explains, the inquiry proceeds to a second question:



   Was the classification motivated by an "intention' to treat some class
differently on the basis of race or, again, any other characteristic said to
call for heightened scrutiny? If the answer is affirmative, heightened scrutiny
must be applied; if negative, the statute must be upheld unless it is not
rationally related to a legitimate state interest. n233

 Under the vetting and screening protocols of the No Fly List, there is no
classification or characteristic that warrants "heightened" scrutiny. Further,
thus far, there is no evidence that the vetting and database screening protocol
is motivated by an "intention" to discriminate on the basis of an impermissible
classification. Because equal protection is not a viable option to challenge the
No Fly List - as the screening is applied in a purportedly equal manner - the
use or misuse of data-driven tools has been central to the inquiry in the
federal courts.

   Specifically, No Fly List litigation has been primarily successful through
procedural due process claims, though many plaintiffs also originally raised
substantive due process claims. n234 The due process challenge to the No Fly
List is relevant here because that challenge attacks the workings of the vetting
and screening processes, and, importantly, how identity-management technology
can lead to stigmatization and reputational harms, allegedly on the basis of
classification. For the purposes of this discussion, therefore, it is helpful to
concurrently examine the due process analysis of two similar No Fly List cases,
though acknowledgeable differences exist between them.

   In both Ibrahim v. Department of Homeland Security n235 and Latif v. Holder,
n236 federal courts analyzed due process claims that the plaintiffs' rights to
travel were infringed upon by their inclusion on the No Fly List. In Latif, the
plaintiffs argued that the No Fly List burdens a protected liberty interest n237
without due process of law: namely, that their placement on the No Fly List
burdened their liberty interests in the freedom of travel, n238 and freedom from
the false stigmatization and association with terrorists and  [*670]
terroristic activities implicit in inclusion on the No Fly List. n239 Similarly,
the plaintiff in Ibrahim alleged deprivations of her liberty and property
interests without due process of law. n240

   Once a protected liberty interest in either the travel or reputational
interest was established, in each case, the plaintiffs were required to satisfy
the three-part due process test set forth in Mathews v. Eldridge. n241 Under
Mathews, the court weighs: (1) "the private interest that will be affected by
the official action"; (2) "the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest
through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or
substitute procedural safeguards"; and (3) "the Government's interest, including
the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the
additional or substitute procedural requirement would entail." n242

   For example, under the first Mathews factor in Latif, the plaintiffs
contended that protected liberty interests reside in freedom of travel and
movement, and in reputational concerns. n243 Under the second factor, the
plaintiffs argued that the redress procedure inherently risks an unacceptably
high error rate because it does not allow plaintiffs, or other individuals
placed on the No Fly List, the opportunity to confront or rebut any evidence
used in determining the appropriateness of their placement on the list. n244 In
other words, the vetting and screening protocol of the No Fly List allowed for
discrimination on the back end in that those singled out as potential threats
had no meaningful redress. Finally, regarding the third factor, although
national security is a significant government interest, the procedural
protections provided to plaintiffs were insufficient given the lack of notice
and "wholly ineffective" procedures of the protocol. n245

   The No Fly List due process challenges are necessary to challenge back-end
discrimination because there is no other way to interrogate the classification
mechanism used to assess threat risk or what data might be deemed suspicious. In
other words, there may be alleged commonalities among those finding themselves
on the No Fly List, such as being Muslim American, Arab American, a citizen of a
Muslim-majority country, or of Middle Eastern descent. Because the government
argues that the No Fly List involves classified information - including database
screening systems and vetting protocols that make "predictive judgments" - there
is no meaningful way to interrogate how and why that characteristic predominates
among those selected by the algorithm or digital watchlisting technology. n246

    [*671]  The closest plaintiffs on the No Fly List have come to determining
whether and how they faced classification-based discrimination is through a
deconstruction of the digital watchlisting architecture and an analysis of the
databases that may be implicated in the vetting and screening protocols. n247
The complaints and trial records appear to suggest that the No Fly List results
in a disparate impact. n248 The algorithms and databases present themselves as
neutral, without bias. Thus, due process protection allows for some
interrogation of the vetting and database screening systems and its errors.

   Human error can become unimpeachable truth but for legal challenges. Database
error risks a form of unimpeachable truth without a legal theory to challenge
it. What are the reasons for being wrongly placed on the No Fly List? How does
one prove discriminatory animus in vetting and screening protocols? How does one
establish algorithm-derived discrimination? The No Fly List litigation shows
that equal protection as a theory fails to shield those suffering disparate
treatment or de facto back-end discrimination under the current framework for
evaluating Fourteenth Amendment claims.

   As in Plessy, Algorithmic Jim Crow may offer theoretical equality that may
thwart challenges under the Equal Protection Clause. As in Korematsu,
governmental action taken purportedly in defense of national security may be
viewed as legitimately containing risk and may not be construed as targeting
individuals on the basis of classification. Plessy and Korematsu represent two
discredited cases that are now considered a part of what Richard Primus and
other scholars refer to as the "anti-canon" of constitutional law. n249 Just as
those challenging the constitutionality of historic Jim Crow regimes in Plessy
and Japanese internment in Korematsu were unsuccessful, those challenging
Algorithmic Jim Crow regimes may face similar difficulties due to similar
deficiencies in current jurisprudence.

   IV. Future of Algorithmic Jim Crow

 To further illustrate how screening and vetting protocols can be extended to
the entire citizenry, Part IV examines how the Supreme Court has handled
challenges to multiple identity-management programs in recent years. Parties in
several cases are attempting to seek judicial review of government
identity-management programs and dataveillance technologies, programs that are
rapidly flourishing in both scope and number. The Supreme Court has now had the
opportunity to review multiple identity-management  [*672]  systems in NASA v.
Nelson, n250 Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting, n251 and Arizona v. United States.
n252 In each of these cases, however, the equal protection consequences of the
vetting protocols were not before the Supreme Court.

   A. Biometric Credentialing and Vetting Protocols: NASA v. Nelson

 Nelson n253 involved a challenge to aspects of Homeland Security Presidential
Directive 12: Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees
and Contractors (the "HSPD-12" program) n254 in an effort to limit the impact of
this identity-management program on personal privacy rights. n255 HSPD-12 is a
post-9/11 presidential directive promulgated by the Bush administration to
implement a biometric ID-credentialing and background-check program for federal
employees and federal contractors. HSPD-12 and the litigation surrounding Nelson
provide an opportunity to examine the impact of identity-management
technologies. It explores some future implications of these technologies,
including the possibility of morality testing in civilian background tests,
which was originally at issue in the case.

   Exploring the impact of such identity-management technologies, including the
possibility of morality testing, is also important given the stated purposes for
extreme vetting procedures set forth in President Trump's Executive Orders on
immigration. The January 27, 2017, Order specifically states that its purpose is
to include an assessment of the ideological and constitutional posture of
immigrants through extreme vetting:



   In order to protect Americans, the United States must ensure that those
admitted to this country do not bear hostile attitudes toward it and its
founding principles. The United States cannot, and should not, admit those who
do not support the Constitution, or those who would place violent ideologies
over American law. n256

 Although the March 6, 2017, Order does not include this language, the screening
and vetting requirements set forth in section 5 are more expansive and
ambiguous. For instance, instead of focusing on constitutional ideology, section
5 casts a wide precrime net, stating that the screening and vetting standards
will analyze, for example, the "risk of causing harm." n257

    [*673]  The September 24, 2017, Order increases the ambiguity of the
screening and vetting mandate even further. In section 1(a) of the September 24,
2017, Order, it states that the purpose and policy of the Proclamation is "to
protect its citizens from terrorist attacks and other public-safety threats.
Screening and vetting protocols and procedures associated with visa
adjudications and other immigration processes play a critical role in
implementing that policy." n258

   The September 24, 2017, Order does not define how threat risks will be
assessed, nor does it provide specific details on the "screening and vetting
protocols and procedures" that are prescribed. However, in several sections,
including sections 1(b), 1(c)(i), and 1(d), the Order refers to the need to
implement "identity-management and information-sharing protocols and
procedures." n259 The opacity of these "protocols and procedures" reemphasizes
the ambiguity of the precrime mandate suggested by the Orders. Nelson,
therefore, is particularly relevant to understanding the ambition of the Orders,
as the HSPD-12 program that was challenged in Nelson was intended to help
implement "identity-management and information-sharing protocols and procedures"
after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.

   In Nelson, NASA contractors argued that the background check required by the
HSPD-12 program violated a constitutional right to informational privacy. The
Court ruled against the NASA contractors, holding that the background-check
process that was challenged consisted of "reasonable, employment-related
inquiries that further the Government's interests in managing its internal
operations." n260

   The Supreme Court's decision in Nelson was widely anticipated by privacy
experts and scholars. Over three decades have passed since the Court "referred
broadly to a constitutional privacy "interest in avoiding disclosure of personal
matters.'" n261 When the Court granted certiorari, therefore, some were hopeful
that Nelson presented a ripe opportunity to reaffirm the role of a
constitutional right to information privacy in safeguarding private individuals
- here, privately employed scientist-contractors performing low-security-risk
research for NASA through a private university - from unnecessarily overbroad
disclosure requirements by the government and the risks of inadvertent or
malicious exposure of personal information that could result from the
government's digitalized data collection procedures. As one amicus brief filed
in the case explained, "Constitutional privacy safeguards are particularly
important in this case because NASA's failure to meet its  [*674]  obligations
under the Privacy Act and the agency's poor data security practices pose
substantial risks to the scientists' personal information." n262

   Given the significance of the case, especially in light of increasing public
concerns about suspicionless data mining by the government and recent
well-publicized cases of database compromise through hackers, some were
surprised when the Court issued its decision rather quickly and summarily,
fairly soon after oral argument. In a relatively brief opinion, the Supreme
Court "assumed, without deciding, that the Constitution protects a privacy
right." n263 The Court then concluded that NASA's background check, newly
implemented to bring the federal agency into compliance with HSPD-12, did not
violate a right to privacy, if one were to assume that such a right might exist.
n264 The Court held that "the Government's interests as employer and proprietor
in managing its internal operations, combined with the protections against
public dissemination provided by the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a (2006
ed. and Supp. IV), satisfy any "interest in avoiding disclosure' that may
"arguably have its roots in the Constitution.'" n265

   With its decision, the Supreme Court overturned a preliminary injunction that
had ordered the suspension of NASA's background-check process after the Ninth
Circuit found aspects of the government's questions to be in violation of the
scientists' constitutional right to privacy. n266 The Supreme Court explained
that the Ninth Circuit was in error because "the questions challenged by
respondents are part of a standard employment background check of the sort used
by millions of private employers." n267 Yet, the significance of this case is
misstated and misunderstood when cast as a simplistic battle over
background-check protocol under the government's HSPD-12 program and whether
that protocol may or may not implicate constitutional privacy interests.

   Both the Supreme Court and the Ninth Circuit focused on a series of
drug-related questions presumed to be the most objectionable to the scientists
and that are listed on the Standard Form 85: Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive
Positions ("SF 85"). n268 SF 85 asks whether an employee has "used, possessed,
supplied, or manufactured illegal drugs" in the last year. n269 In issuing the
preliminary injunction, the Ninth Circuit concluded that the form's ""open-ended
and highly private' questions ... were not "narrowly tailored' to meet the
Government's interests in verifying contractors'  [*675]  identities and
"ensuring the security" of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at NASA. n270

   In a footnote, the Court noted a compelling question raised by the scientists
that had been dismissed by the Ninth Circuit as unripe and had not been made the
subject of a cross-petition: a question of the so-called "suitability" criteria
that the government used to determine employment eligibility at Jet Propulsion
Laboratory. n271 These factors include consideration of a candidate's financial
and emotional health as well as things like "carnal knowledge." n272 The
"suitability" criteria were derived from a ninety-four-page government vetting
protocol document titled, "NASA Desk Guide for Suitability and Security
Clearance Processing, Version 2." n273

   Specifically, understanding the scientists' constitutional informational
privacy claim requires an understanding of the morality-and character-testing
criteria that were open for questioning and evaluation during the
background-check process required under NASA's implementation of HSPD-12. On
page sixty-five of the desk guide, NASA includes an "Issue Characterization
Chart" that allows NASA to assess individuals' character and "suitability" based
on more than 100 itemized characteristics. n274 These items appeared to assess
good moral character and trustworthiness. Characteristics on the evaluation
include: "drunk"; "bad check"; "pattern of irresponsibility as reflected in
credit history"; "carnal knowledge"; "indecent proposal"; "sodomy"; "voyeurism
[or] peeping tom"; "mailing, selling, or displaying obscene material";
"beastiality"; "pattern of excessive [substance abuse] as reflected in inability
to function responsibly [and] medical treatment or poor health"; "disorderly
conduct"; "attitude [and] personality conflict"; "trespassing"; and "minor
traffic violation." n275

   Upon successful completion of the NASA "Suitability and Security Clearance
Processing" protocol, the desk guide authorizes the agency to issue the NASA
employee or private contractor a biometric ID card in accordance with HSPD-12.
n276 Failure to pass this newly implemented clearance process results in the
termination of employment. n277 While the "suitability" criteria were not before
the Court, the acting solicitor general nevertheless felt compelled to assert at
oral argument that "NASA will not and does not use"  [*676]  such objectionable
criteria "to make contractor credentialing decisions." n278 The need for such
assurance indicates the scientists did indeed have real privacy concerns, even
if they did not crystallize into part of a live claim before the Court.

   Thus, lost in this case was a real concern about what information NASA, or
any other government agency, is allowed to seek under the identity-verification
procedures imposed by HSPD-12 and whether the constitution, under a privacy
right, imposes any fundamental limiting principles on that identity-verification
process. The acting solicitor general's assurance that intimate personal details
regarding credit card debt and carnal knowledge, for example, will not be
considered by NASA is nothing more than that - just an assurance. Meanwhile the
"suitability" criteria that could be used to determine the denial of the
issuance of a biometric ID card under HSPD-12 makes clear that fears that
government identity-management programs may become overbroad and overintrusive
are not paranoid or baseless.

   Nelson, by affirming HSPD-12, may now pave the way for the implementation of
a biometric credentialing program and uniform biometric-based dataveillance
program on a national scale. Nelson also demonstrates how suitable character
testing or morality testing can be built into modern vetting protocols in
civilian background checks, as the facts of the case demonstrated that NASA
employees and contractors were required to demonstrate trustworthiness and good
character before receipt of the biometric identification card.

   Under a universal biometric identification system, however, suitability
testing or character-vetting protocols could be embedded within the database
screening system itself. Thus, the morality testing would not necessarily arrive
at the front end of the vetting process, as was seen in Nelson. Rather, the
accumulation of biometric and biographic data enables both biometric and
suitability testing. Rather than clearing a suitability assessment in order to
qualify for a biometric ID card, a biometric-anchored database screening system
could allow for moral-and suitability-criteria testing on the back end of the
vetting process. Recent disclosures by Edward Snowden, for example, explain how
biometric data can be fused with biographic data to assess risk. n279

   This development in Supreme Court jurisprudence is, thus, significant because
the original announcement of Trump's "Muslim Ban" indicated that the proposal
was inclusive of U.S. citizens. Specifically, on December 8, 2015, shortly after
then-candidate Trump announced plans for the Muslim  [*677]  travel ban, he
suggested in a nationally televised interview n280 that the ban could possibly
extend to Muslim Americans. n281 Trump invoked former President Franklin D.
Roosevelt's World War II proclamation that U.S. citizens who were potentially
"enemy aliens" could be detained. n282

   On January 28, 2017, one day after President Trump signed the Executive Order
imposing restrictions on the travel and immigration of citizens of
Muslim-majority nations, Fox News asked former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani
whether the Executive Order was, in fact, a Muslim ban. n283 Guiliani explained:
"When [Trump] first announced it [during the campaign], he said, "Muslim ban.'
He called me up. He said, "Put a commission together. Show me the right way to
do it legally.'" n284 Giuliani elaborated further: "And what we did was, we
focused on, instead of religion, danger ... . Perfectly legal, perfectly
sensible. And that's what the ban is based on. It's not based on religion. It's
based on places where there are [sic] substantial evidence that people are
sending terrorists into our country." n285 This suggests that discriminatory
vetting and screening protocols can evade judicial review if a protected class
is targeted indirectly through "race-neutral" criteria, such as threat risk
assessments.

   In Washington v. Trump, n286 litigation that addressed the first Executive
Order, the Ninth Circuit disagreed that the government had established
sufficient evidence of an impending national security threat. n287 On February
9, 2017, in upholding the Western District of Washington's grant of a temporary
restraining order, halting the implementation of the Executive Order, the Ninth
Circuit concluded: "The Government has not offered any evidence or even an
explanation of how the national security concerns that justified those
designations [of travel and immigration restrictions], which triggered visa
requirements, can be extrapolated to justify an urgent need for the Executive
Order to be immediately reinstated." n288

   In subsequent litigation, the Fourth and Ninth Circuits agreed that the
Government had failed to show a sufficient justification for the Executive
Order. In Hawaii v. Trump, n289 the Ninth Circuit panel explained that the
president had not made a "sufficient finding ... that entry of the excluded
[*678]  classes would be detrimental to ... the United States." n290 In
International Refugee Assistance Project, the Fourth Circuit noted that while
the government argued that it had a national security purpose in issuing the
Order, evidence supporting such a purpose was "comparably weaker" than
then-candidate Trump's statements about a Muslim ban, subsequent statements on
the issues, statements made by his advisors, as well as the issuance of and
statements made by President Trump and his advisors regarding the second
Executive Order. n291 At the time this Article: was written, the Supreme Court
had granted certiorari in both cases and consolidated them for argument. n292

   On February 24, 2017, the Associated Press reported that a leaked memo
drafted at the request of the DHS acting Under Secretary for Intelligence and
Analysis concluded "citizenship is an unlikely indicator of terrorism threats to
the United States." n293 The memo states that the analysis undertaken by DHS
specifically analyzed the threat of the "seven countries [that were] impacted by
[section 3 of Executive Order] 13769." n294 The DHS memo states that "of
[eighty-two] people the government determined were inspired by a foreign
terrorist group to carry out or try to carry out an attack in the United States
[since the Syrian conflict commenced in March 2011], just over half were U.S.
citizens born in the United States." n295 The DHS memo further states that the
terrorists were from "[twenty-six] countries, led by Pakistan, Somalia,
Bangladesh, Cuba, Ethiopia, Iraq and Uzbekistan. Of these, only Somalia and Iraq
were among the seven nations included in the ban." n296 Both the Ninth and
Fourth Circuits discussed this memorandum and relied on it in their rulings.
n297

   Importantly, the original January 27, 2017, Order states that vetting policy
should include a test to assess fidelity to founding principles and the
Constitution. n298 Statements by Trump suggest that such vetting should  [*679]
include a test to assess loyalty to the United States and whether an individual
will "support our country, and love deeply our people." n299 He further
promoted, as a candidate, the implementation of profiling and preventative
measures, such as mass surveillance, to assess terroristic risk. n300

   In Nelson, twin innovations in national security policy and biometric
surveillance policy included a machine-readable biometric ID card encoded with
digitalized biometric data and other personally identifiable data, as was
required by the HSPD-12 program. In the suitability criteria developed by NASA,
a version of extreme vetting emerged. The January 27, 2017, Order discusses the
need to implement loyalty tests that demonstrate "pro-American" values. Thus,
extreme vetting may be expanded to encompass similar abstract assessments of
character and morality as a part of threat risk assessments.

   By affirming the credentialing protocol surrounding HSPD-12 and sanctioning
an identity-management technology, Nelson opens the door to profound questions
of constitutional law, electronic privacy law and policy, and surveillance
policy that have yet to be resolved. These questions include the role of
biometric technology and dataveillance in national security policy and
immigration-control policy. It now remains to be seen whether HSPD-12 will
eventually serve as a programmatic and technological prototype for a national
biometric ID system, such as a biometric social security card or biometric
ePassport, in the future.

   B. Delegating Vetting and Database Screening Protocols to States and Private
Entities

 In addition to de facto discrimination, Algorithmic Jim Crow regimes can
promote de jure discrimination or discrimination as a matter of law. n301 Under
historic Jim Crow regimes, enforcement of segregationist laws was delegated to
both public and private entities. n302 Those who participated in segregation
gatekeeping often did so under the threat of legally imposed sanctions. n303

   Resistance to the mandate to segregate train service, for instance, led to
the initiation of a legal challenge to Louisiana's Jim Crow laws in Plessy,
which required the cooperation of railway companies that were frustrated with
their  [*680]  gatekeeping duties under the Separate Car Act. n304 Railway
companies opposed the segregation law on the ground that running two train cars
- one for white passengers and one for black passengers - was economically
costly, especially for train routes on which ridership had proven to be light.
n305 The petitioners also argued that it was unlawful to delegate segregationist
gatekeeping to the private companies who would be fined for allowing black
passengers to ride white railcars. n306 Homer Adolph Plessy had been selected to
violate the Jim Crow law specifically because he was a light-skinned black man
who could "pass" as a white man. n307

   Yet, a similar de jure discrimination scheme may be emerging in the modern
era. How do private and state immigration gatekeepers determine whether an
individual is lawfully present in the United States? Under the Immigration
Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), n308 the federal government delegated
immigration enforcement authority to all employers, public and private, to
assist in immigration gatekeeping duties through the examination of paper-based
documents that purport to establish identity and citizenship status. n309 Under
IRCA, employers faced civil and criminal fines for failure to participate in
sorting out undocumented immigrants from the workforce. n310

   In 1990, the Wall Street Journal editorial pages compared federal
employer-sanctioning policies required under federal immigration law to historic
Jim Crow regimes. The publication explained that private entities were once
again asked to engage in discrimination n311 under the law by effectually being
deputized as immigration gatekeepers. Specifically, the Wall Street Journal
described IRCA as "the first legislation since Jim Crow where the government is
so closely aligned with a process that produces discrimination." n312

   From the 1970s to the present, immigration laws at the federal and state
level have attempted to restrict immigrant access to transportation and travel,
employment, education, housing, and benefits. n313 In contrast to historic Jim
[*681]  Crow regimes, however, the targeting of the undocumented immigrant
population does not need to proceed under a facade of "equality" because such
discrimination is often construed as legally permissible. Undocumented
immigrants, with important exceptions, do not enjoy the broad civil rights
protections and constitutional rights afforded to U.S. citizens. n314 Even
lawful immigrants may face more restricted rights than U.S. citizens. n315 Those
arguing in favor of tough immigration actions, including those defending the
Executive Orders, have explained this position as a legal defense of such
actions. n316

   Yet, for decades, lawful immigrants and those perceived to be foreign have
alleged that they suffer from a form of collateral discrimination: an assumption
of undocumented status and accidental targeting that stems from restrictive
immigration laws. n317 Studies have consistently shown that vetting and
screening protocols required by immigration gatekeeping - sometimes referred to
as "show me your papers" laws - incentivize racial profiling. n318 In other
words, mandatory document checks often target those perceived to be foreign:
those who may be isolated on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, national
origin, religion, and "foreignness" characteristics, n319 such as accent,
clothing, and a failure to present "whiteness" characteristics. n320

   In response to growing empirical evidence that immigration-related screening
and delegated gatekeeping duties by the government reliably led to
discrimination, Congress increasingly looked to technological screening methods
as "race-neutral" tools to achieve the same means. n321 Throughout the 1990s
until the present, immigration reform legislation has proposed database-driven
methods to implement screening and gatekeeping  [*682]  functions. n322 Many of
these database screening methods are experimental and still under testing. n323

   Nonetheless, the 9/11 terror attacks accelerated the rollout of these
experimental vetting and screening systems. n324 The immigrant status of the
9/11 hijackers led to calls for policy initiatives that could facilitate the
identification and more efficient tracking of immigrants and potential
terrorists through cybersurveillance and dataveillance technologies. n325 Many
of these technologies were dependent upon biometric data monitoring and
database-facilitated algorithmic sorting tools. n326 The impetus was not so much
to avoid bias in screening but to harness the supposed efficiencies and
reliability of a database-centered means of screening.

   Since 9/11, immigration policy and national security policy have increasingly
converged. At the federal level, this convergence could be seen in the
increasing adoption of big data identity-management systems aimed to screen the
population to determine who could receive rights and benefits, such as the No
Fly List, n327 the No Work List ("E-Verify"), n328 and the No  [*683]
Citizenship List (managed by Secure Communities n329 and the DHS's Prioritized
Enforcement Program n330 ). These database screening and digital watchlisting
systems purport to further crime control, immigration control, and
counterterrorism objectives. The E-Verify database has not only been used to
restrict employment opportunities, but it is alleged that landlords have used
the database to screen tenants and that school officials have used the database
to screen students. n331 Similarly, the No Vote List ("SAVE" n332 and  [*684]
"HAVA" n333 ) has been used for voter purges and to restrict driver's licenses
as well as access to welfare benefits. n334

   After 9/11, the federal government sought a sharp increase in personnel who
could conduct vetting and implement screening protocols to increase the
effectiveness of immigration gatekeeping. n335 Thus, the federal government also
increasingly invited state and local law enforcement to participate in the
enforcement of federal immigration law under a "force multiplier" theory n336 of
delegation of immigration gatekeeping. n337 Under the expanded immigration
gatekeeping mandates of DHS, state and local governments were granted access to
DHS database screening systems and invited to screen arrestees through these
systems. n338 After 9/11, the federal government also experimented with the
merging of database screening protocols to eliminate the separation between
civil and criminal immigration database screening protocols. n339

   Under immigration federalism and national security federalism, state laws
have increasingly captured post-9/11 identity-management technologies introduced
by DHS. Consequently, comparisons between historic Jim Crow regimes and
contemporary immigration enforcement regimes have intensified in recent years.
De jure discrimination has been alleged in state laws that mandate vetting
protocols and the delegation of vetting and  [*685]  screening responsibilities.
Similar to the segregationist gatekeeping duties that were delegated under
historic Jim Crow regimes, restrictionist immigration gatekeeping protocols
under Algorithmic Jim Crow have been criticized as promoting both de jure and de
facto discrimination against citizens and lawful immigrants that may be
perceived to be foreign. n340 Specifically, state laws have proposed that legal
penalties and liabilities could be incurred by employers, police, landlords,
doctors, school officials, and state benefits administrators who fail to conduct
vetting and screening protocols.

   For instance, the Los Angeles Times invoked Jim Crow comparisons after
passage of Alabama House Bill 56, a state law that attempted to control unwanted
migration in part by delegating immigration screening to both private and public
entities. n341 Wade Henderson, president of the Leadership Conference on Civil
and Human Rights, also drew a comparison. On June 9, 2011, the day Alabama House
Bill 56 was signed into law, he remarked: "Even Bull Connor himself would be
impressed," referring to the famed segregationist who served as Birmingham's
public safety commissioner tasked with enforcing the city's Jim Crow laws during
the 1950s. n342

   Similarly, the governor of Arizona signed SB 1070 into law in 2013, referred
to as the "racial profiling" law and the "show me your papers law." n343 Shortly
thereafter, Reverend Lennox Yearwood of the Hip Hop Caucus, wearing a "Boycott
Arizona" cap, declared during an interview that the Arizona immigration law is
"our Jim Crow moment for the 21st century." n344 He further stated, "We can't
have anyone being checked based on the hue of their color ... . We need to put
our lives on the line [in protest] ... . We need to stand up." n345 Members of
Congress likened the Arizona law to Jim Crow and historic apartheid systems.
n346

   In future comprehensive immigration reform proposals and in the
implementation of extreme vetting protocols - especially with the Supreme Court
in both Whiting and Arizona apparently endorsing a potential merger between
criminal and civil database screening protocols - it is possible that  [*686]
other public and private actors could be delegated counterterrorism
intelligence-gathering duties pursuant to immigration gatekeeping duties under
the "force multiplier" approach. In Whiting, the Supreme Court upheld the
constitutionality of delegating immigration database screening to private
employers through the passage of the Legal Arizona Workers Act (LAWA). n347
Under LAWA, employers in Arizona were not only document-inspecting immigration
gatekeepers. n348 LAWA also transformed public and private employers into
database screening gatekeepers through a legal requirement that they run all new
hires through the E-Verify identity-management system, which allows employers to
screen employees through various federal agency databases. n349

   Similarly, in Arizona, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of
delegating immigration-database screening to state and local law enforcement
after the passage of Arizona's SB 1070. n350 Similar to LAWA, state and local
law enforcement were transformed into database screening gatekeepers through a
legal requirement that they run all arrestees and those suspected of unlawful
presence through S-COMM, an internet-based database screening system that checks
biometric data (scanned fingerprints) against DHS and FBI databases.

   For example, in addition to Arizona's establishment of an
employer-sanctioning regime in LAWA (holding private employers responsible), and
a police-sanctioning regime in SB 1070 (holding state and local law enforcement
responsible), the state proposed a landlord-sanctioning regime in SB 1611, n351
enacted a state-worker-sanctioning regime in HB 2008, n352 proposed a
hospital-worker-sanctioning regime in SB 1405, n353 and proposed and enacted a
public-school-worker-or teacher-sanctioning regime in SB 1407 n354 and SB 1141.
n355

   Each of Arizona's proposed sanctioning regimes requires a screening or
vetting system because otherwise, the Arizona legislature has contended, it
[*687]  could not verify who among its residents is an unauthorized immigrant
and who is not. The identity-management technology often relied upon by the
state gatekeeping law involved an algorithm-based database screening protocol,
often supplemented by a paper-based inspection, to log personally identifiable
data into a preexisting vetting and database screening system operated by DHS.
Although not all of these measures passed, the gatekeeping and screening aspects
of Arizona's proposed comprehensive immigration reform strategy, as well as
other state and local laws passed or considered in recent years, has resulted in
an unprecedented expansion of document inspection and database-driven screening
protocols. n356

   Arizona's aggressive stance on restrictive immigration gatekeeping is enabled
by the introduction of big data vetting analytics and database screening
potentialities, often conducted through internet-based screening of DHS and
other federal agency databases. It shows the multifold opportunities for
electronic vetting in daily life. And while it is a system to screen out
immigrants, at the national level and in the national security context, newly
emerging digital watchlisting and database screening programs such as the No Fly
List make clear that database screening is easily adaptable to other kinds of
vetting for various purposes. Those screened or vetted will individually
encounter a purportedly neutral and colorblind process but with the result that
they fall into groups that can start to look much like the kinds of
classifications that would normally offend the Constitution's equal protection
guarantees.

   Consequently, the extreme vetting protocols and the implementation of a
Muslim registry should be understood within the context of delegated database
screening protocols, such as those proposed and passed by Arizona. As can be
seen in the discussion above, the efforts by the federal and state government to
collect and screen data under the auspices of immigration-control policy now
extend to a wide range of contexts, including employment screening and
day-to-day policing. This appears to be consistent with data-collection and
screening policies under the Trump administration. "Asked where [Muslims] would
be registered, [Trump] said Muslims would be signed up at "different places ...
. It's all about [data] management.'" n357 Candidate Trump specifically referred
to the need to deploy DHS identity-management technologies: "Trump tied his
reasoning for the database to the need to identify who is in the country
legally. "It would stop people from coming in illegally,' Trump said. "We have
to stop people from coming into our country illegally.'" n358

[*688]

   C. Litigating Algorithmic Jim Crow

 The number of individuals and private entities affected by government
identity-management programs is growing as rapidly as the programs themselves,
and future attempts to seek judicially imposed limits on such programs appear
inevitable. The broader question, thus, is not whether the scientists in Nelson
were denied a constitutional right to privacy but whether any limiting principle
can be articulated to curtail the government's attempt to engage in post-9/11,
semiuniversal vetting and screening systems, such as the No Fly List, and
biometric dataveillance credentialing, such as HSPD-12, in the name of
furthering national security, crime control, and immigration policy.

   Under an "equal but separate" regime, identity-management systems that
purport to collect and sort data of individuals equally, however, may impose
disparate consequences through colorblind vetting protocols and "race-neutral"
database screening systems. Yet, whether biometric-based identification systems
can be presented as colorblind and "race-neutral" is in doubt. Racial
characteristics are among the data collected in biometric databases. Soft
biometric data, for instance, includes digital analysis or automated
determination of age, height, weight, race or ethnicity, color of skin and color
of hair, scars and birthmarks, and tattoos. n359 Further, newly developed big
data vetting tools fuse biometric data with biographic data and internet and
social media profiling to algorithmically assess risk. Data fusion techniques
are not race neutral, as recent reports have exposed how data analytics can
result in pinpointing racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic characteristics through
big data analysis tools. n360 As plaintiffs in the No Fly List litigation
allege, those disparately impacted by mandatory vetting and screening protocols
will largely fall within traditional classifications - race, color, national
origin, ethnicity, and religion - depending on what may be determined to be
suspect criteria. n361

   Recent immigration-control policy and programs demonstrate the government's
interest in delegating immigration-vetting duties to private actors, n362 such
as employers, and nonfederal actors, such as state and local law enforcement
n363 or their privatized subdelegates, n364 which can exacerbate issues of
racial profiling and discrimination. For instance, LAWA and Arizona's SB 1070
are examples of immigration federalism and national security federalism.
Immigration federalism traditionally has denoted state  [*689]  and local
efforts to control or mitigate the impact of unwanted migration or to regulate
the admission of noncitizens across state borders. n365 In the past few years,
several thousand state and local immigration-related laws have been considered
in almost every state. n366 This level of immigration federalism activity is
unprecedented in U.S. history. n367

   Also unprecedented, however, is the manner in which immigration federalism is
intersecting with two other critical movements in U.S. history: (1) an
increasing reliance on database-sorting technology and dataveillance in federal
immigration policy to facilitate state-federal partnerships in the control of
unwanted migration; and (2) a post-9/11 national security policy of national
security federalism that encourages a state-federal partnership in the
furtherance of intelligence-gathering and homeland security objectives under a
"force multiplier" theory.

   In the DHS memos released by then-DHS Secretary John Kelly on February 21,
2017, which implemented the Executive Orders on immigration signed by President
Trump on January 25, 2017, DHS stated that the executive branch would apply a
"force multiplier" approach to the immigration-control and national security
effort. n368 Identity-management technologies that rely upon the internet and
digital databases to verify identity have been developed to help execute these
goals. As a presidential candidate, Trump explained that immigration-control and
counterterrorism efforts required "a lot of systems, beyond databases." n369

   Because these statutes are perceived as targeting primarily those born in
foreign countries but residing here, the questions of government intrusion and
disparate impact are obscured. However, while the state and federal laws at
issue may be immigration laws first, they are still identity-screening laws, and
the entire population - citizens and noncitizens - is subject to their vetting
and screening protocols. Consequently, immigration federalism, when combined
with national security federalism, is driving the exponential expansion of
identity-management programs and biometric-database screening.

   Given the historical connection between mass data collection and mass
discrimination, n370 federal courts may require an inquiry into the  [*690]
discriminatory animus in the design of the vetting protocols and the database
screening systems. That inquiry will likely start from an assessment of the
disparate impact of identity-management technologies. Relatedly, challengers and
the courts must contemplate the disparate impact of the algorithms themselves,
the screening inputs that produce the results, and the discriminatory result of
other data-driven decision-making tools, rather than in the personal animus of
the screener. Judicial review should evolve to question analytical assumptions
and to develop evaluative methods to interrogate the underlying algorithms
informing the screening and vetting systems.

   Challengers and federal courts must also become more aware of other types of
discrimination that can be facilitated by digitalized vetting and screening
protocols. Although "data driven discrimination" is not currently recognized, we
can begin challenging the collection of data under privacy theories and attempt
to limit the ways in which judgments can be made based on the analysis of such
data. Nelson, for example, challenged data-driven decisions that imposed
arbitrary definitions of suitability on moral proclivities rather than
decision-making founded on a secure rational basis. n371

   Further, identity-management technologies and Algorithmic Jim Crow may force
innovations in constitutional data-privacy theories. These may include, for
example, asserting a reasonable expectation of privacy under the Fourth
Amendment's prohibition of the search and seizure of data. The original
complaints filed to enjoin LAWA's mandatory E-Verify database screening alleged
a Fourth Amendment violation. n372 Among other challenges, the Chamber of
Commerce argued that E-Verify required an unconstitutional search and seizure of
an employee's personally identifiable information by Arizona employers. n373 The
Fourth Amendment challenge, however, was not the driving force behind the
litigation, was withdrawn by stipulation before the district court, n374 and was
not before the Supreme Court in Whiting, which focused on the question of
preemption. n375 Although the United States only challenged section 2(B) of
Arizona's SB 1070 on preemption grounds, the American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU) had originally raised other constitutional claims, including a Fourth
Amendment claim, to the implementation of section 2(B), which required mandatory
biometric-database screening of those suspected of unlawful presence. n376
[*691]  Once again, the Fourth Amendment claim was not before the Supreme Court
in Arizona, which also focused on preemption. n377

   It is important to note as well that, similar to Korematsu, the No Fly List
challengers have relied on due process rather than equal protection. As in
Korematsu, the government has defended the No Fly List as a national security
program that does not target classifications of individuals, but, rather,
targets risk. In his dissent in Korematsu, Justice Frank Murphy stated that "the
order deprives all those within its scope of the equal protection of the laws as
guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment." n378

   Of the relationship between due process and equal protection, William
Eskridge has observed that "the Due Process Clause announces a procedural norm."
n379 To the extent that the Due Process Clause is recognized to carry a
substantive element, Eskridge explains the courts demand "a fit between the
reasonableness of the deprivation (whatever the process) and the "law of the
land.' The Equal Protection Clause requires the state to justify any difference
in procedural or substantive treatment of one person vis-a-vis another." n380
Consequently, the Equal Protection Clause may be less useful than other
constitutional options that can force political change, such as the Due Process
Clause and the First Amendment. n381

   Eskridge suggests, however, that the Due Process Clause can secure important
rights at the individual level. n382 He notes that our conception of due process
is more elastic and can track changing standards of social progress. n383
Further,



   Perhaps the most fundamental value found in the Due Process Clause is the
idea that the state is obligated to treat every person as a presumptively
worthwhile human being who is entitled to respect and humane treatment. This
principle is the key reason Buck v. Bell and [Korematsu] were wrongly decided."
n384

 Eskridge signals that the time might be right to view equal protection and due
process as "interchangeable and interdependent" in the vindication of individual
rights. n385

   There are benefits to prevailing under an equal protection claim, n386
namely, "the Equal Protection Clause alone offers a minority group a  [*692]
potential constitutional jackpot at the wholesale level, that is, in challenges
to an array of interconnected discriminations in state benefits as well as
burdens." n387 Eskridge posits, however, that due process can yield similar
wholesale benefits to protection as the Equal Protection Clause; under the
Constitution, there is no theoretical or historical limit to extending wholesale
rights to classes of individuals under a due process theory. n388 In fact, a
"destabilizing due process" that offers multiple opportunities to challenge
discrimination can result in an "evolutive equal protection." n389 Thus, the
equal protection process may need to be pushed to evolve to realize new forms of
discrimination once the Due Process Clause forces the federal courts to confront
the unreasonableness of wholesale deprivations and the need to grant wholesale
benefits to challengers alleging the infringement.

   In the context of Algorithmic Jim Crow, however, the interrelationship
between due process and equal protection is more pragmatic. Challenging
algorithm-driven vetting and screening protocols under due process claims means
demanding answers about the "black box" processes that may flag individuals as
potential risks or threats. n390 As the algorithms and data-analytic processes
become more transparent, equal protection violations can no longer be as easily
disguised. This destabilization or disruption of government deprivations made
possible by due process challenges can give new evaluative impetus to the
evolution of the types of protections offered under the Equal Protection Clause.

   Arguably, this process of destabilizing algorithmic due process is already
occurring under due process and equal protection challenges, among others. The
No Work List has been implicated in an equal protection challenge. n391 The No
Vote List has been challenged n392 under section 2 of the Voting Rights  [*693]
Act n393 and the "90 Day Provision" of the National Voter Registration Act. n394
The No Citizenship List has been challenged under both procedural due process
and equal protection claims under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, n395 as
well as under the Fourth Amendment. n396 In addition, the subsequent litigation
of the No Citizenship List was found to implicate the Tenth Amendment under the
anticommandeering doctrine. n397 The No Fly List and Terrorist Watchlist have
been challenged under multiple legal claims  [*694]  and constitutional
theories, n398 including procedural due process and substantive due process
under the Fifth Amendment. n399

   Algorithmic Jim Crow may not be challenged successfully on equal protection
grounds, but, rather, on other legal grounds, such as informational privacy
grounds, the legal claim in Nelson. Nelson is especially useful to the analysis
here as it involves a challenge to both a mandatory biometric ID program and the
vetting protocols associated with the program. n400 Like the loyalty
requirements imposed by the January 27, 2017, Order, n401 the vetting protocols
challenged in Nelson also involved screening criteria to determine
trustworthiness, morality, and suitability - criteria subsequently criticized by
the Court as subjective and objectionable. n402

   Consequently, legal responses to Algorithmic Jim Crow may require
preconceiving identity-management harms to encompass a broad range of legal
theories. As in the No Fly List litigation, the government will likely defend
disparate-impact consequences as justified based upon risk assessments,
terroristic classifications, data-screening results deemed suspect, and
characteristics establishing unsuitability. n403 These are classifications and
characteristics not protected by equal protection jurisprudence. To acknowledge
the harms emerging from Algorithmic Jim Crow, equality law should be broadened
to recognize data-driven discrimination and recognition of algorithm-and big
data-derived disparate impact, rather than limiting protection to only
animus-based, classification-driven discrimination.

   Conclusion

 Algorithmic Jim Crow regimes are distinguished from historic Jim Crow regimes
in several significant respects. Algorithmic Jim Crow is cybersurveillance
driven and dataveillance dependent, built around the transparency of biometric
identity and other technologies of identity management, monitoring internet and
social media activity and contact lists through telephony databases, database
screening and digital watchlisting enforcement, and other emerging big data
surveillance techniques. In contrast, traditional Jim Crow is law driven, built
around the transparency of racial identity; monitoring economic, educational,
political, and social  [*695]  activity; and utilizing traditional criminal
enforcement and detention tools as well as small data surveillance techniques.
Algorithmic Jim Crow describes an "equal but separate" system of de jure and de
facto discrimination rather than the "separate but equal" discrimination of
historic Jim Crow.

   The goal of Algorithmic Jim Crow is not physical separation per se. Rather,
all individuals subjected to an Algorithmic Jim Crow regime may be equally
vetted through database screening and digital watchlisting systems. The
separation, however, is achieved through data discrimination applied on the back
end of screening and vetting protocols rather than overt social and economic
discrimination and legal apartheid applied on the front end of segregationist
regimes. The "equal but separate" impact of Algorithmic Jim Crow will likely
manifest itself in the big data assessment of risk factors that purport to
predict terroristic and criminal threat rather than segregation systems of
racial or ethnic classification.

   In other words, individuals will be at risk of disparate treatment on the
basis of suspicious algorithmic results and anomalous data, or "foreignness"
characteristics. Thus, disparate treatment stemming from cybersurveillance and
dataveillance may not be characterized as traditional discrimination:
discrimination on the basis of a historically protected class, for instance,
race, color, ethnicity, national origin, and sex. This type of
identity-management, technology-based discrimination may, therefore, fall
outside current interpretations of the scope of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal
Protection Clause and outside the reach of the protection of civil rights
statutes.

   Algorithmic vetting and biometric identification, especially once deployed
across an entire citizenry, will likely lead to discriminatory profiling and
surveillance on the basis of suspicious digital data and internet and social
media activity deemed "suspect," as well as classification-based discrimination,
such as the isolation of those emigrating from Muslim-majority nations. These
systems are likely to result in both direct and collateral discrimination on the
basis of citizenship status, national origin, and religion, in particular. In
addition, recent immigration-control policies and programs demonstrate the
government's willingness to delegate screening and vetting duties to private
actors, such as employers and local law enforcement, which can exacerbate issues
of racial profiling and discrimination. This discrimination may face limited or
lenient review by a federal judiciary that generally grants broad deference in
matters of immigration and national security.

   Because Algorithmic Jim Crow may appear to offer equality in theory, it may
not be challenged successfully on equal protection grounds under the current
equal protection framework. Thus, the jurisprudence must evolve to encompass new
harms and recognize the disparate-impact harms of Algorithmic Jim Crow regimes.
At the same time, Algorithmic Jim Crow must be challenged under other legal
theories, including search and seizure of data under the Fourth Amendment,
procedural due process and informational privacy rights under substantive due
process guarantees of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, First Amendment
theories, and other statutory and constitutional theories. Wholesale disruptions
to Algorithmic  [*696]  Jim Crow under a wide range of legal theories will
likely force an evolution of equal protection jurisprudence.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Constitutional LawEqual ProtectionScope of ProtectionGovernmentsFederal
GovernmentDomestic SecurityLabor & Employment LawDiscriminationDisparate
ImpactEmployment PracticesSelection ProceduresNeutral Factors

FOOTNOTES:




n1.  See, e.g., Jeremy Diamond, Donald Trump: Ban All Muslim Travel to U.S., CNN
(Dec. 8, 2015, 4:18 AM),
http://www.cnn.com/2015/12/07/politics/donald-trump-muslim-ban-immigration/
[https://perma.cc/L3D4-UMHX]. Immigration, constitutional, and national security
experts have offered perspectives on the ongoing legal challenges surrounding
the Travel Ban. See generally Margaret Hu, Crimmigration-Counterterrorism and
the Travel Ban, 2017 Wis. L. Rev. (forthcoming) (citing Adam Cox, Why a Muslim
Ban Is Likely to Be Held Unconstitutional: The Myth of Unconstrained Immigration
Power, JustSecurity (Jan. 30, 2017, 10:21 AM),
https://www.justsecurity.org/36988/muslim-ban-held-unconstitutional-myth-unconst
rained-immigration-power/ [https://perma.cc/H234-52N2]; then citing Mark
Tushnet, Mootness and the Travel Ban, Balkinization (June 2, 2017, 1:18 AM)
https://balkin.blogspot.com/2017/06/mootness-and-travel-ban.html
[https://perma.cc/2LNR-J67T]; then citing Marty Lederman, Unlocking the
Mysteries of the Supreme Court's Entry Ban Case, JustSecurity (June 27, 2017,
8:01 PM), https://www.justsecurity.org/42577/mysteries-trump-v-irap/
[https://perma.cc/JAM4-D97M]; and then citing Leah Litman & Steve Vladeck, How
the President's "Clarifying" Memorandum Destroys the Case for the Entry Ban,
JustSecurity (June 15, 2017, 8:01 AM),
https://www.justsecurity.org/42166/presidents-clarifying-memorandum-destroys-cas
e-entry-ban/ [https://perma.cc/6APK-MZGL]).





n2.  Gerhard Peters & John T. Wooley, Presidential Debate at Washington
University in St. Louis, Missouri, Am. Presidency Project (Oct. 9, 2016),
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=119038
[https://perma.cc/A79V-TLVW]; see also Peter Margulies, Bans, Borders, and
Justice: Judicial Review of Immigration Law in the Trump Administration at 35-48
(Roger Williams Univ. Sch. of Law, Research Paper No. 177, 2017),
http://ssrn.com/abstract=3029655 [https://perma.cc/E5DP-UDQQ] (arguing for a
more searching judicial review of "extreme vetting" and the need to recognize
the significant long-term impact of "extreme vetting").





n3.  Peters & Wooley, supra note 2.





n4.  Exec. Order No. 13,769, 82 Fed. Reg. 8977 (Feb. 1, 2017) [hereinafter
January 27, 2017, Order].





n5.  See, e.g., Washington v. Trump, 847 F.3d 1151, 1157 (9th Cir. 2017) (per
curiam).





n6.  January 27, 2017, Order, supra note 4,§§3, 5(c).





n7.  See, e.g., Hawaii v. Trump, 859 F.3d 741, 760 (9th Cir.) (per curiam)
(alleging violations of the Establishment Clause, the Equal Protection and Due
Process Clauses of the Fifth Amendment (both procedural and substantive claims),
the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, and
the Administrative Procedure Act), cert. granted, 137 S. Ct. 2080 (2017); Int'l
Refugee Assistance Project v. Trump, 857 F.3d 554, 578-79 (4th Cir.) (claiming
violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fifth Amendment, the
Immigration and Nationality Act, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, the
Refugee Act, and the Administrative Procedure Act), cert. granted, 137 S. Ct.
2080 (2017); Washington, 847 F.3d at 1157, 1165, 1167 (alleging that the
Executive Order violates that First Amendment's Establishment Clause, due
process, and equal protection); Darweesh v. Trump, 17 Civ. 480 (AMD), 2017 WL
388504 (E.D.N.Y. Jan. 28, 2017) (alleging that the Executive Order violates the
Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses).





n8.  Exec. Order No. 13,780, 82 Fed. Reg. 13,209 (Mar. 6, 2017) [hereinafter
March 6, 2017, Order].





n9.  Id. §§1-2; see also id. § 5 ("Implementing Uniform Screening and Vetting
Standards for All Immigration Programs").





n10.  Compare id., with January 27, 2017, Order, supra note 4, § 4.





n11.  March 6, 2017, Order, supra note 8, § 5.





n12.  137 S. Ct. 2080 (2017).





n13.  Presidential Proclamation, Enhancing Vetting Capabilities and Processes
for Detecting Attempted Entry into the United States by Terrorists or Other
Public-Safety Threats (Sept. 24, 2017) [hereinafter "September 24, 2017,
Order"],
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/09/24/enhancing-vetting-capabil
ities-and-processes-detecting-attempted-entry [https://perma.cc/R678-KL5F].





n14.  Id.





n15.  Id.; see also infra note 50 and accompanying text (discussing U.S.
Department of Homeland Security definition of "identity management").





n16.  Trump v. Int'l Refugee Assistance Project, Nos. 16-1436, 16-1540, slip op.
(U.S. Sept. 25, 2017),
https://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/courtorders/092517zr_jiel.pdf
[https://perma.cc/24F6-5MFB] (ordering parties to file letter briefs addressing
whether, or to what extent, the Proclamation issued on September 24, 2017, may
render the consolidated cases moot).





n17.  See, e.g., Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 26-27,
Iranian Alliances Across Borders, Univ. of Md. Coll. Park Chapter v. Trump, No.
8:17-cv-02921-GJH (D. Md. Oct. 2, 2017) (seeking declaratory and injunctive
relief from the September 24, 2017, Order and alleging that the Order violates
the antidiscrimination provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act, 8
U.S.C. § 1152(a)(1)(A) (2012)); Letter from ACLU to Hon. Theodore D. Chuang,
U.S. Dist. Ct. for the Dist. of Md. (Sept. 29, 2017),
https://www.aclu.org/letter/irap-v-trump-pmc-letter [https://perma.cc/KKL8-DM8W]
(seeking to amend the complaint in International Refugee Assistance Project in
light of the September 24, 2017, Order); see also Complaint for Declaratory and
Injunctive Relief at 1, Brennan Ctr. for Justice at N.Y. Univ. Sch. of Law v.
U.S. Dep't. of State, No. 1:17-cv-07520 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 2, 2017) (seeking
disclosure of reports referred to in sections 1(c) and 1(h) of the September 24,
2017, Order, pursuant to the disclosure requirements of the Freedom of
Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552 (2012)).





n18.  Litigation surrounding the March 6, 2017, Order addressed sections 2 and
6, which bar the entry of travelers from six designated countries and limit
refugee admissions. See Hawaii, 859 F.3d at 757-59; Int'l Refugee Assistance
Project, 857 F.3d at 574-75.





n19.  The implementation of "extreme vetting" measures appears to be underway.
See Notice of Modified Privacy Act System of Records, 82 Fed. Reg. 179 (Sept.
18, 2017); 60-Day Notice of Proposed Information Collection: Supplemental
Questions for Visa Applicants, 82 Fed. Reg. 148 (Aug. 3, 2017).





n20.  See, e.g., Hu, supra note 1; Margulies, supra note 2. Increasing attention
has been focused on the efficacy of the social media screening of immigration
vetting protocols. See, e.g., Office of Inspector Gen., Dep't of Homeland Sec.,
OIG-17-40, DHS' Pilots for Social Media Screening Need Increased Rigor to Ensure
Scalability and Long-Term Success (2017),
https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/2017/OIG-17-40-Feb17.pdf
[https://perma.cc/5ACP-GU2G]; Lily Hay Newman, Feds Monitoring Social Media Does
More Harm Than Good, Wired (Sept. 28, 2017, 8:00 AM),
https://www.wired.com/story/dhs-social-media-immigrants-green-card/
[https://perma.cc/2FC5-FPKC].





n21.  January 27, 2017, Order, supra note 4, § 4; March 6, 2017, Order, supra
note 8, § 5; September 24, 2017, Order, supra note 13, § 1(a)-(h).





n22.  As a presidential candidate, Trump announced his plans to implement a
program of "extreme vetting" of immigrants and refugees in a campaign speech on
the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) in August 2016. See Jeremy Diamond,
Trump Proposes Values Test for Would-Be Immigrants in Fiery ISIS Speech, CNN
(Aug. 15, 2016, 9:39 PM)
http://www.cnn.com/2016/08/14/politics/donald-trump-isis-fight/index.html
[https://perma.cc/8GU4-9AEK]. Several scholars have observed that the president
enjoys wide powers in the exercise of immigration law and policy, especially
through executive action. See, e.g., Adam B. Cox & Cristina M. Rodriguez, The
President and Immigration Law, 119 Yale L.J. 458, 500 (2009); Adam B. Cox &
Cristina M. Rodriguez, The President and Immigration Law Redux, 125 Yale L.J.
104, 108 (2015).





n23.  See generally Jonathan Scott Holloway, Jim Crow Wisdom: Memory and
Identity in Black America Since 1940 (2013); Jumpin' Jim Crow: Southern Politics
from Civil War to Civil Rights (Jane Dailey et al. eds., 2000); Mattias Smangs,
Doing Violence, Making Race: Southern Lynching and White Racial Group Formation,
121 Am. J. Soc. 1329 (2016). For contemporary discussions on the complexity of
what has been termed a "post-racial" America, see generally Devon W. Carbado &
Mitu Gulati, Acting White? Rethinking Race in "Post-Racial" America (2013); The
New Black: What Has Changed - and What Has Not - with Race in America (Kenneth
W. Mack & Guy-Uriel E. Charles eds., 2013); Charlton McIlwain, Racial Formation,
Inequality and the Political Economy of Web Traffic, 20 Info. Comm. & Soc'y 1073
(2016); Angela Onwuachi-Willig, Policing the Boundaries of Whiteness: The
Tragedy of Being "Out of Place" from Emmett Till to Trayvon Martin, 102 Iowa L.
Rev. 1113 (2017); Camille Gear Rich, Marginal Whiteness, 98 Calif. L. Rev. 1497
(2010); infra Part I.A.





n24.  Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 550-51 (1896), overruled by Brown v. Bd.
of Educ., 347 U.S. 483 (1954) ("We cannot say that a law which authorizes or
even requires the separation of the two races in public conveyances is
unreasonable ... .").





n25.  The Supreme Court has characterized de jure discrimination as encompassing
state-sanctioned or state-imposed discrimination under the law, prohibited under
the Equal Protection Clause. See, e.g., Brown, 347 U.S. at 490 (explaining that
the Fourteenth Amendment "proscribes all state-imposed discriminations against
the Negro race").





n26.  Nonracial classifications that result in de facto discrimination or
disparate-impact discrimination may not be found to violate the Equal Protection
Clause. See, e.g., Village of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Hous. Dev. Corp., 429
U.S. 252, 270 (1977) (explaining that the party asserting an equal protection
violation bears the burden to show that the governmental action was intended to
discriminate against a suspect or protected class); Milliken v. Bradley, 418
U.S. 717, 745 (1974) (distinguishing de jure and de facto segregation with
express and explicit policies that articulate race-based distinctions defined as
de jure discrimination); see also Frank I. Goodman, De Facto School Segregation:
A Constitutional and Empirical Analysis, 60 Calif. L. Rev. 275, 275 (1972);
Richard A. Primus, Equal Protection and Disparate Impact: Round Three, 117 Harv.
L. Rev. 494, 496-97 (2003).





n27.  See infra Part III.A.





n28.  See, e.g., Lawrence Lessig, Code Version 2.0, at 209 (2006)
("[Cybersurveillance is] the process by which some form of human activity is
analyzed by a computer according to some specified rule ... . The critical
feature in each [case of surveillance] is that a computer is sorting data for
some follow-up review by some human.").





n29.  See generally Roger A. Clarke, Information Technology and Dataveillance,
31 Comm. ACM 498 (1988). Roger Clarke describes dataveillance as "the systematic
use of personal data systems in the investigation or monitoring of the actions
or communications of one or more persons." Id. at 499; see also David Lyon,
Surveillance Studies: An Overview 16 (2007) ("Being much cheaper than direct
physical or electronic surveillance[, dataveillance] enables the watching of
more people or populations, because economic constraints to surveillance are
reduced. Dataveillance also automates surveillance. Classically, government
bureaucracies have been most interested in gathering such data ... .").





n30.  See, e.g., Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and
the U.S. Surveillance State 6 (2014). See generally Shane Harris, @War: The Rise
of the Military-Internet Complex (2014); Lyon, supra note 29; Dana Priest &
William M. Arkin, Top Secret America: The Rise of the New American Security
State (2011); Jeffrey Rosen, The Naked Crowd: Reclaiming Security and Freedom in
an Anxious Age (2005); Deven R. Desai, Constitutional Limits on Surveillance:
Associational Freedom in the Age of Data Hoarding, 90 Notre Dame L. Rev. 579
(2014); Anil Kalhan, Immigration Surveillance, 74 Md. L. Rev. 1 (2014); Paul
Ohm, Electronic Surveillance Law and the Intra-Agency Separation of Powers, 47
U.S.F. L. Rev. 269 (2012); Neil M. Richards, The Dangers of Surveillance, 126
Harv. L. Rev. 1934 (2013).





n31.  See, e.g., Julia Angwin, Dragnet Nation: A Quest for Privacy, Security,
and Freedom in a World of Relentless Surveillance 17-18 (2014); Robert O'Harrow,
Jr., No Place to Hide, 221-23 (2005); see also Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Big
Brother's Little Helpers: How ChoicePoint and Other Commercial Data Brokers
Collect and Package Your Data for Law Enforcement, 29 N.C. J. Int'l L. & Com.
Reg. 595, 596 (2004); Jeffrey Rosen, The Deciders: Facebook, Google, and the
Future of Privacy and Free Speech, in Constitution 3.0: Freedom and
Technological Change 69, 69-72 (Jeffrey Rosen & Benjamin Wittes eds., 2011).





n32.  See generally Rob Kitchin, The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data
Infrastructures & Their Consequences (2014); Viktor Mayer-Schonberger & Kenneth
Cukier, Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think
(2013); Privacy, Big Data, and the Public Good: Frameworks for Engagement (Julia
Lane et al. eds., 2014).





n33.  See, e.g., Dep't of Homeland Sec., Privacy Impact Assessment Update for
the Future Attribute Screening Technology (FAST)/Passive Methods for Precision
Behavioral Screening 5 (2011),
https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_pia _st_fast-a.pdf
[https://perma.cc/YQ4W-VM5P].





n34.  See, e.g., Refugee Processing and Security Screening, U.S. Citizenship &
Immigr. Services (Dec. 3, 2015), https://www.uscis.gov/refugeescreening
[https://perma.cc/4Z6R-C3QQ].





n35.  Current refugee vetting procedures include database screening through the
U.S. Department of Defense's Defense Forensics and Biometrics Agency's (DFBA)
Automated Biometric Identification System (ABIS). Id. ("A biometric record check
of the Department of Defense's (DOD) records collected in areas of conflict
(predominantly Iraq and Afghanistan). DOD screening began in 2007 for Iraqi
applicants and has now been expanded to all nationalities.").





n36.  Current refugee vetting procedures include database screening through the
"National Counterterrorism Center/Terrorist Screening Center (terrorist watch
lists)" and the "FBI Fingerprint Check through Next Generation Identification
(NGI)." Id.





n37.  Biometrics is "the science of automatic identification or identity
verification of individuals using physiological or behavioral characteristics."
John Vacca, Biometric Technologies and Verification Systems 589 (2007).





n38.  See Databases, INTERPOL,
https://www.interpol.int/INTERPOL-expertise/Databases
[https://perma.cc/RVM3-JKJ6] (last visited Oct. 16, 2017).





n39.  See, e.g., Dep't of Homeland Sec., Privacy Impact Assessment for the
Automated Biometric Identification System (IDENT) 15 (2012),
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
privacy/PIAs/privacy_pia_usvisit_ident_ appendixj_jan2013.pdf
[https://perma.cc/2LW4-PJSS]; Office of Biometric Identity Management
Identification Services, Dep't Homeland Security,
https://www.dhs.gov/obim-biometric-identification-services
[https://perma.cc/VN5T-H6UH] (last visited Oct. 16, 2017).





n40.  See, e.g., Dep't of Homeland Sec., Privacy Impact Assessment for the Iris
and Face Technology Demonstration and Evaluation (IFTDE) 2 (2010),
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/privacy _pia_st_iftde.pdf
[https://perma.cc/A9MP-CRCF].





n41.  See, e.g., Dep't of Homeland Sec., Privacy Impact Assessment Update for
the Standoff Technology Integration and Demonstration Program: Biometric Optical
Surveillance System Tests 2 (2012),
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/privacy_
pia_st_stidpboss_dec2012.pdf [https://perma.cc/L7XK-EDK9].





n42.  See, e.g., Dep't of Homeland Sec., Privacy Impact Assessment for the Rapid
DNA System 2 (2013),
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/privacy
-pia-rapiddna-20130208.pdf [https://perma.cc/K9NN-F4PL].





n43.  See, e.g., Charles E. Schumer & Lindsey O. Graham, The Right Way to Mend
Immigration, Wash. Post (Mar. 19, 2010),
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/03/17/
AR2010031703115.html [https://perma.cc/Y5GF-WE2M] ("We would require all U.S.
citizens and legal immigrants who want jobs to obtain a high-tech, fraud-proof
Social Security card. Each card's unique biometric identifier would be stored
only on the card ... .").





n44.  See, e.g., Eric Markowitz, Retina Scanners and Biometric Passports: A Look
at the Futuristic Tech That Could Scan Refugees, Int'l Bus. Times (Nov. 25,
2015, 11:29 AM),
http://www.ibtimes.com/retina-scanners-biometric-passports-look-futuristic-tech-
could-scan-refugees-2199960 [https://perma.cc/ 6AZC-3EV9].





n45.  March 6, 2017, Order, supra note 8, § 8; January 27, 2017, Order, supra
note 4, § 7.





n46.  John Burnett, Former Immigration Director Defends U.S. Record on Refugee
Vetting, NPR (Feb. 3, 2017, 4:35 PM),
http://www.npr.org/2017/02/03/513311323/former-immigration-director-defends-u-s-
record-on-refugee-vetting [https://perma.cc/U99Q-RWT5] (noting that the former
director of the Office of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services of the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security under the Obama administration "pointed out that
his office had been checking Facebook, Twitter and Instagram accounts of
prospective refugees from Syria and Iraq since 2015").





n47.  Alexander Smith, U.S. Visitors May Have to Hand over Social Media
Passwords: DHS, NBC News (Feb. 8, 2017, 7:51 AM),
http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/us-visitors-may-have-hand-over-social-media-
passwords-kelly-n718216 [https://perma.cc/7WK4-FDKB].





n48.  See id.; see also Notice of Modified Privacy Act System of Records, 82
Fed. Reg. 179 (Sept. 18, 2017).





n49.  See, e.g., Dep't of Homeland Sec., supra note 33; see also infra Part I.A.





n50.  DHS offers this definition of identity management:



   Identity Management (IdM) deals with identifying and managing individuals
within a government, state, local, public, or private sector network or
enterprise. In addition, authentication and authorization to access resources
such as facilities or, sensitive data within that system are managed by
associating user rights, entitlements, and privileges with the established
identity.

 Cyber Security Division Identity Management Program Video, Dep't Homeland
Security, https://www.dhs.gov/science-and-technology/
cyber-security-division-identity-management-program-video
[https://perma.cc/9NGG-8G28] (last visited Oct. 16, 2016).





n51.  See, e.g., Steven Finlay, Predictive Analytics, Data Mining and Big Data:
Myths, Misconceptions and Methods 3 (2014); Eric Siegel, Predictive Analytics:
The Power to Predict Who Will Click, Buy, Lie, or Die 59-60 (2013); Nate Silver,
The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail - but Some Don't 417-18
(2012); see also Spencer Woodman, Palantir Provides the Engine for Donald
Trump's Deportation Machine, Intercept (Mar. 2, 2017, 1:18 PM),
https://theintercept.com/2017/03/02/palantir-provides-the-engine-for-donald-trum
ps-deportation-machine/ [https://perma.cc/4B2H-JLHV] (reporting that the DHS
awarded a private contractor a $ 41 million contract to build an "Investigative
Case Management" system to allow DHS to "access a vast "ecosystem' of data to
facilitate immigration officials in both discovering targets and then creating
and administering cases against them").





n52.  See Margaret Hu, Biometric ID Cybersurveillance, 88 Ind. L.J. 1475,
1478-82 (2013).





n53.  See, e.g., Countering Violent Extremism, Dep't Homeland Security (Jan. 19,
2017), https://www.dhs.gov/countering-violent-extremism
[https://perma.cc/5CS6-TL7X]; see also Trevor Aaronson, The Terror Factory:
Inside the FBI's Manufactured War on Terrorism 19 (2013); Colin Moynihan, A New
York City Settlement on the Surveillance of Muslims, New Yorker (Jan. 7, 2016),
http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/a-new-york-city-settlement-on-surveillan
ce-of-muslims [https://perma.cc/X6J9-Y2EQ] ("After the attacks of September 11,
2001, the New York Police Department began an intense surveillance operation
that focused on Muslims in New York City ... . They eavesdropped on
conversations in restaurants and cafes, catalogued memberships in mosques and
student organizations, and ... tried to bait people into making inflammatory
statements.").





n54.  See, e.g., Laura K. Donohue, Bulk Metadata Collection: Statutory and
Constitutional Considerations, 37 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 757, 863-64 (2014);
Laura K. Donohue, Section 702 and the Collection of International Telephone and
Internet Content, 38 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 117, 151-52, 157, 164 n.83, 202-19
(2015).





n55.  Exec. Order No. 9066, 3 C.F.R.§§1092-93 (1942).





n56.  Id.





n57.  323 U.S. 214 (1944); see also Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81,
100 (1943) ("Distinctions between citizens solely because of their ancestry are
by their very nature odious to a free people whose institutions are founded upon
the doctrine of equality.").





n58.  Korematsu, 323 U.S. at 223.





n59. " What I'm doing is no different than FDR," Trump told ABC News during the
presidential campaign. Meghan Keneally, Donald Trump Cites These FDR Policies to
Defend Muslim Ban, ABC News (Dec. 8, 2015, 1:01 PM),
http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald-trump-cites-fdr-policies-defend-muslim-ban
/story?id=35648128 [https://perma.cc/FY3H-9NNE].





n60.  Shortly after President Trump's election, Carl Higbie, a former spokesman
for the Great America Political Action Committee, stated on Fox News that a
Muslim database registry would be legal and would "hold constitutional muster"
under Korematsu, explaining, "We did it during World War II with the Japanese
... ." Derek Hawkins, Japanese American Internment Is "Precedent' for National
Muslim Registry, Prominent Trump Backer Says, Wash. Post (Nov. 17, 2016),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2016/11/17/
japanese-internment-is-precedent-for-national-muslim-registry-prominent-trump-ba
cker-says/ [https://perma.cc/SF5A-4HEK].





n61.  Equal protection jurisprudence and the foundations for differing standards
of judicial review based upon protected classification has yielded rich
scholarship. See generally John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust: A Theory of
Judicial Review 105-81 (1980); Bruce A. Ackerman, Beyond Carolene Products, 98
Harv. L. Rev. 713, 714-16 (1985); Mario L. Barnes et al., A Post-Race Equal
Protection?, 98 Geo. L.J. 967 (2010); Katharine T. Bartlett, Tradition as Past
and Present in Substantive Due Process Analysis, 62 Duke L.J. 535, 540-48
(2012); Robert M. Cover, The Origins of Judicial Activism in the Protection of
Minorities, 91 Yale L.J. 1287, 1294-97 (1982); Trina Jones, Shades of Brown: The
Law of Skin Color, 49 Duke L.J. 1487 (2000); Michael Klarman, An Interpretive
History of Modern Equal Protection, 90 Mich. L. Rev. 213, 219 (1991); Melissa
Murray, Equal Rites and Equal Rights, 96 Calif. L. Rev. 1395 (2008); Bertrall L.
Ross II, The Representative Equality Principle: Disaggregating the Equal
Protection Intent Standard, 81 Fordham L. Rev. 175 (2012); Jed Rubenfeld, The
Anti-Antidiscrimination Agenda, 111 Yale L.J. 1141, 1143 (2002); Kenji Yoshino,
The New Equal Protection, 124 Harv. L. Rev. 747, 748, 755-63 (2011).





n62.  Hiroshi Motomura is credited with introducing the term "immigration
federalism" into academic discourse to describe state and local involvement in
immigration. Peter J. Spiro, Learning to Live with Immigration Federalism, 29
Conn. L. Rev. 1627, 1627 (1997); see also Pratheepan Gulasekaram & S. Karthick
Ramakrishnan, Immigration Federalism: A Reappraisal, 88 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 2074,
2096 (2013); Clare Huntington, The Constitutional Dimension of Immigration
Federalism, 61 Vand. L. Rev. 787, 788 n.6 (2008) (crediting Motomura with
"defining immigration federalism as "states and localities play[ing a role] in
making and implementing law and policy relating to immigration and immigrants'"
(citing Hiroshi Motomura, Federalism, International Human Rights, and
Immigration Exceptionalism, 70 U. Colo. L. Rev. 1361, 1361 (1999))).





n63.  See, e.g., Matthew C. Waxman, National Security Federalism in the Age of
Terror, 64 Stan. L. Rev. 289, 289 (2012); see also Kris W. Kobach, Reinforcing
the Rule of Law: What States Can and Should Do to Reduce Illegal Immigration, 22
Geo. Immigr. L.J. 459, 475 (2008).





n64.  See, e.g., Shirin Sinnar, Rule of Law Tropes in National Security, 129
Harv. L. Rev. 1566, 1569 (2016); see also Sahar F. Aziz, Policing Terrorists in
the Community, 5 Harv. Nat'l Security J. 147, 222 (2014) (discussing
counterterrism law enforcement).





n65.  See Ryan Lizza, Why Sally Yates Stood Up to Trump, New Yorker (May 29,
2017),
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/05/29/why-sally-yates-stood-up-to-trump
[https://perma.cc/JHF9-73DM] (explaining that Yates learned of the Order upon
being notified by a deputy who read the news online).





n66.  Id. ("Yates read through the briefs, and thought that two arguments
against the order were particularly strong... . [The order] arguably violated
the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. And ... there seemed to be
serious due-process questions.").





n67.  Id.





n68.  Id.





n69.  Letter from Sally Yates, Acting Attorney Gen., Dep't of Justice, to Dep't
of Justice (Jan. 30, 2017),
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/01/30/us/document-Letter-From-Sally-Yat
es.html [https://perma.cc/T7KF-HNUC].





n70.  Id.





n71.  Lizza, supra note 65 ("The statement was sent to thousands of department
employees around the country. About four hours later, at around 9 P.M., McGahn's
office asked the senior Trump appointee to deliver a letter to Yates, notifying
her that she had been fired.").





n72.  See, e.g., Guy-Uriel E. Charles & Luis Fuentes-Rohwer, State's Rights,
Last Rites, and Voting Rights, 47 Conn. L. Rev. 481, 486 nn.23-24 (2014); Atiba
R.Ellis, The Cost of the Vote: Poll Taxes, Voter Identification Laws, and the
Price of Democracy, 86 Denv. U. L. Rev. 1023, 1024 n.7 (2009).





n73.  Ellis, supra note 72, at 1040 n.79, 1041-50.





n74.  See, e.g., Ibrahim v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., 62 F. Supp. 3d 909, 929
(N.D. Cal. 2014) ("By this order, all defendants shall specifically and
thoroughly query the databases maintained by them, such as the TSDB, TIDE,
CLASS, KSTF, TECS, IBIS, TUSCAN, TACTICS, and the no-fly and selectee lists ...
.").





n75.  Adam Nossiter et al., Three Teams of Coordinated Attackers Carried Out
Assault on Paris, Officials Say; Hollande Blames ISIS, N.Y. Times (Nov. 14,
2015),
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/15/world/europe/paris-terrorist-attacks.html
[https://perma.cc/KSJ4-RLT5].





n76.  Id.





n77.  Id.





n78.  Id.





n79.  Steve Almasy et al., Paris Massacre: At Least 128 Killed in Gunfire and
Blasts, French Officials Say, CNN (Nov. 14, 2015, 9:48 AM),
http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/13/world/paris-shooting/
[https://perma.cc/RU5V-Z3TM].





n80.  Christiane Amanpour & Thom Patterson, Passport Linked to Terrorist
Complicates Syrian Refugee Crisis, CNN (Nov. 15, 2015, 12:24 PM),
http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/15/europe/paris-attacks-passports/index.html
[https://perma.cc/HLB4-SJUX].





n81.  Id.





n82.  Id.





n83.  Ashley Fantz & Ben Brumfield, More Than Half the Nation's Governors Say
Syrian Refugees Not Welcome, CNN (Nov. 19, 2015, 3:20 PM),
http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/16/world/paris-attacks-syrian-refugees-backlash/
[https://perma.cc/VW6W-8FFF] (reporting that the many states refused to accept
Syrian refugees for resettlement, including: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas,
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Wisconsin, and Wyoming).





n84.  See Michael Ignatieff, The Refugees and the New War, N.Y. Rev. Books (Dec.
17, 2015), http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2015/12/17/refugees-and-new-war/
[https://perma.cc/5A9J-5L3V].





n85.  Id.; see also Katie Worth, Can Biometrics Solve the Refugee Debate?, PBS
(Dec. 2, 2015),
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/can-biometrics-solve-the-refugee-debat
e/ [https://perma.cc/XT36-TMK6].





n86.  Markowitz, supra note 44.





n87.  Michael S. Schmidt & Richard Perez-Pena, F.B.I. Treating San Bernardino
Attack as Terrorism Case, N.Y. Times (Dec. 4, 2015),
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/05/us/tashfeen-malik-islamic-state.html
[https://perma.cc/MRP4-KFPJ].





n88.  Id.





n89.  Id.





n90.  Id.





n91.  Id.





n92.  Id.





n93.  Lisa Lambert et al., House to Consider Changes to Visa Waiver Program,
Including "Smart' Passports, Reuters (Dec. 2, 2015, 8:16 AM),
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/12/02/us-usa-congress-visas-idUSKBN0TL1CV201
51202 [https://perma.cc/W32F-SLZR].





n94.  See Diamond, supra note 1.





n95.  Associated Press, How Donald Trump's Plan to Ban Muslims Has Evolved,
Fortune (June 28, 2016), http://fortune.com/2016/06/28/donald-trump-muslim-ban/
[https://perma.cc/X29Y-XCPM].





n96.  See David Mark & Jeremy Diamond, Trump: "I Want Surveillance of Certain
Mosques,' CNN (Nov. 21, 2015),
http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/21/politics/trump-muslims-surveillance/
[https://perma.cc/78YW-SQEV].





n97.  See Lizette Alvarez et al., Orlando Gunman Was "Cool and Calm' After
Massacre, Police Say, N.Y. Times (June 13, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/14/us/orlando-shooting.html
[https://perma.cc/8VX9-98WB].





n98.  Lizette Alvarez & Richard Perez-Pena, Orlando Gunman Attacks Gay
Nightclub, Leaving 50 Dead, N.Y. Times (June 12, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/13/us/orlando-nightclub-shooting.html
[https://perma.cc/BP5N-6MHX].





n99.  See Emily Schultheis, Donald Trump: U.S. Must "Start Thinking About"
Racial Profiling, CBS News (June 19, 2016),
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-after-orlando-racial-profiling-not-the-
worst-thing-to-do/ [https://perma.cc/8XG8-7E23].





n100.  See, e.g., Diamond, supra note 1.





n101.  Diamond, supra note 22.





n102.  Emily Schultheis, Donald Trump Doubles Down in Immigration Speech:
"Mexico Will Pay for the Wall," CBS News (Aug. 31, 2016),
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-delivers-immigration-speech-in-phoenix/
[https://perma.cc/E59J-RR2S].





n103.  Id.





n104.  See generally 1 Race, Law, and American History 1700-1990: African
Americans and the Law (Paul Finkelman ed., 1992); Frank J. Scaturro, The Supreme
Court's Retreat from Reconstruction: A Distortion of Constitutional
Jurisprudence (2000); Stephen L. Wasby et al., Desegregation from Brown to
Alexander (1977); C. Vann Woodward, The Strange Career of Jim Crow (3d rev. ed.
2002); Gabriel J. Chin, Jim Crow's Long Goodbye, 21 Const. Comment. 107 (2004);
Gabriel J. Chin & Randy Wagner, The Tyranny of the Minority: Jim Crow and the
Counter-Majoritarian Difficulty, 43 Harv. C.R.-C.L.L. Rev. 65 (2008); James W.
Fox, Jr., Doctrinal Myths and the Management of Cognitive Dissonance: Race, Law,
and the Supreme Court's Doctrinal Support of Jim Crow, 34 Stetson L. Rev. 293
(2005); James W. Fox, Jr., Intimations of Citizenship: Repressions and
Expressions of Equal Citizenship in the Era of Jim Crow, 50 How. L.J. 113
(2006); Rachel D. Godsil, Race Nuisance: The Politics of Law in the Jim Crow
Era, 105 Mich. L. Rev. 505 (2006); Ariela J. Gross, Litigating Whiteness: Trials
of Racial Determination in the Nineteenth-Century South, 108 Yale L.J. 109
(1998); Trina Jones, Brown II: A Case of Missed Opportunity?, 24 L. & Ineq. 9
(2006); Jose Roberto Juarez, Jr., Recovering Texas History: Tejanos, Jim Crow,
Lynchings & the University of Texas School of Law, 52 S. Tex. L. Rev. 85 (2010);
Kenneth W. Mack, Foreword: : A Short Biography of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
67 SMU L. Rev. 229 (2014); Kenneth W. Mack, Law, Society, Identity, and the
Making of the Jim Crow South: Travel and Segregation on Tennessee Railroads,
1875-1905, 24 L. & Soc. Inquiry 377 (1999) [hereinafter Mack, Law, Society,
Identity]; Kenneth W. Mack, Rethinking Civil Rights Lawyering and Politics in
the Era Before Brown, 115 Yale L.J. 256 (2005); David Martin, The Birth of Jim
Crow in Alabama 1865-1896, 13 Nat'l Black L.J. 184 (1993); Jennifer Roback,
Southern Labor Law in the Jim Crow Era: Exploitative or Competitive, 51 U. Chi.
L. Rev. 1161 (1984); Benno C. Schmidt, Jr., Principle and Prejudice: The Supreme
Court and Race in the Progressive Era. Part 1: The Heyday of Jim Crow, 82 Colum.
L. Rev. 444 (1982); Barbara Y. Welke, Beyond Plessy: Space, Status, and Race in
the Era of Jim Crow, 2000 Utah L. Rev. 267; John W. Wertheimer et al., "The Law
Recognizes Racial Instinct": Tucker v. Blease and the Black-White Paradigm in
the Jim Crow South, 29 L. & Hist. Rev. 471 (2011); Joseph R. Palmore, Note: ,
The Not-So-Strange Career of Interstate Jim Crow: Race, Transportation, and the
Dormant Commerce Clause, 1878-1946, 83 Va. L. Rev. 1773 (1997); Anders Walker,
Jim Crow's Unwritten Code, Jotwell (Jan. 16, 2017),
https://legalhist.jotwell.com/jim-crows-unwritten-code/
[https://perma.cc/K4EH-J6K7].





n105.  Jerrold M. Packard, American Nightmare: The History of Jim Crow vii-viii
(2002). For other sources on the history and impact of Jim Crow, see generally
F. Michael Higginbotham, Ghosts of Jim Crow: Ending Racism in Post-Racial
America (2013); Holloway, supra note 23; Kimberley Johnson, Reforming Jim Crow:
Southern Politics and State in the Age before Brown (2010); Stetson Kennedy, Jim
Crow Guide: The Way it Was (Fl. Atl. Univ. Press 1990) (1959); Michael J.
Klarman, From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for
Racial Equality (2004); Pauli Murray, States' Laws on Race and Color (1950);
Remembering Jim Crow: African Americans Tell About Life in the Segregated South
(William H. Chafe et al. eds., 2001); The Folly of Jim Crow: Rethinking the
Segregated South (Stephanie Cole & Natalie J. Ring eds., 2012); Leslie V.
Tischauser, Jim Crow Laws (2012); Woodward, supra note 104; Richard Wormser, The
Rise and Fall of Jim Crow (2003); Stephen Ansolabehere & Samuel Issacharoff, The
Story of Baker v. Carr, in Constitutional Law Stories 271 (Michael C. Dorf ed.,
2d ed. 2009); Cheryl I. Harris, The Story of Plessy v. Ferguson: The Death and
Resurrection of Racial Formalism, in Constitutional Law Stories, supra at 187.





n106.  Tischauser, supra note 105, at 1. For an overview of state laws on race
during the Jim Crow era, see generally Murray, supra note 105.





n107.  Packard, supra note 105, at 64.





n108.  See, e.g., Murray, supra note 105, at 21-34, 38-50, 77-117, 164-95,
198-211, 237-50, 329-48, 406-22, 427-56, 461-90 (detailing state laws on race in
effect during the Jim Crow era in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Texas, and Virginia); Packard, supra note 105, at 62-65; Tischauser, supra note
105, at 35-37; see also Thomas Pearce Bailey, Race Orthodoxy in the South and
Other Aspects of the Negro Question 92-93 (1914) (describing "the racial creed
of the Southern people").





n109.  Packard, supra note 105, at 64.





n110.  Id. at 64-65.





n111.  See Kennedy, supra note 105, at 63-71; Tischauser, supra note 105, at
150-51; James R. Browning, Anti-Miscegenation Laws in the United States, 1 Duke
B.J. 26, 31 (1951); Paul A. Lombardo, Miscegenation, Eugenics, and Racism:
Historical Footnotes to Loving v. Virginia, 21 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 421, 425-26 &
n.18 (1988) (discussing judicial decisions supporting antimiscegenation laws);
see also Loving v. Commonwealth, 147 S.E.2d 78, 83 (Va. 1966) (upholding
Virginia's antimiscegenation statute). But see Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1,
12 (1967) ("There can be no doubt that restricting the freedom to marry solely
because of racial classifications violates the central meaning of the Equal
Protection Clause.").





n112.  See, e.g., Kennedy, supra note 105, at 147-64; Klarman, supra note 105,
at 28-39; Tischauser, supra note 105, at 47-50; Ansolabehere & Issacharoff,
supra note 105, at 297; see also Williams v. Mississippi, 170 U.S. 213, 225
(1898) (concluding that state constitutional requirements of poll taxes and
literacy for voting did not discriminate based on race). But see Harper v. Va.
Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 666 (1966) ("We conclude that a State violates
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment whenever it makes the
affluence of the voter or payment of any fee an electoral standard... . The
Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment restrains the States from
fixing voter qualifications which invidiously discriminate."); Louisiana v.
United States, 380 U.S. 145, 154-56 (1965) (finding that state constitutional
provisions that require voters to satisfy voting registrars that they understand
and can interpret the U.S. or Louisiana constitutions violate the Constitution
and are inconsistent with prohibitions against race-based voting discrimination
under the Fifteenth Amendment); United States v. Mississippi, 380 U.S. 128, 151
(1965) (concluding that the attorney general has the power to sue a state and
state officials to protect voting rights of African American citizens).





n113.  See Kennedy, supra note 105, at 86-108; Tischauser, supra note 105, at
38-46, 116-17 (discussing the impact of Jim Crow policies in education). But see
Brown v. Bd. of Educ., 347 U.S. 483, 495 (1954) (holding that segregation of
public educational facilities results in deprivation of equal protection under
the Fourteenth Amendment and that "separate educational facilities are
inherently unequal"); McLaurin v. Okla. State Regents, 339 U.S. 637, 642 (1950);
Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 634-35 (1950).





n114.  See Kennedy, supra note 105, at 109-30.





n115.  See Tischauser, supra note 105, at 68-69 ("Some towns excluded all people
of color from residing anywhere within their boundaries, or, in the case of
"sundown towns,' had laws making it a crime for people of color to be found
within city limits after 8:00 p.m."). But cf.  Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1,
22 (1948).





n116.  See Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 551-52 (1896), overruled by Brown,
347 U.S. 483; Kennedy, supra note 105, at 178-89; A. K. Sandoval-Strausz,
Travelers, Strangers, and Jim Crow: Law, Public Accommodations, and Civil Rights
in America, 23 L. & Hist. Rev. 53, 54 (2005); see also Heart of Atlanta Motel,
Inc., v. United States, 379 U.S. 241, 257 (1964).





n117.  See, e.g., Kennedy, supra note 105, at 190-202; Tischauser, supra note
105, at 68 ("By 1920, Southern state legislatures and governors had passed more
than 350 segregation laws ... [that] separated people by race in cemeteries,
churches, hospitals, labor unions, prisons, offices, factories, mines, parks,
public buildings, railway trains, railway station waiting rooms, housing
developments, neighborhoods, schools, stores, streetcars, theaters, funeral
parlors, and any other places people could meet."); Harris, supra note 105, at
187. See generally Packard, supra note 105.





n118.  See, e.g., Kennedy, supra note 105, at 203-27 (discussing "the dictates
of racist etiquette"). See generally Remembering Jim Crow, supra note 105.





n119.  See Tischauser, supra note 105, at 2.





n120.  See, e.g., Williams v. Mississippi, 170 U.S. 213, 222-25 (1898); Plessy,
163 U.S. at 544; The Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 25-26 (1883).





n121.  See Ian Haney Lopez, White by Law: The Legal Construction of Race 81-86
(rev. ed. 2006) (discussing segregation era laws and arguing that law
"constructs racial differences on several levels through the promulgation and
enforcement of rules that determine permissible behavior"); Packard, supra note
105, at 94-100 (discussing racial definitions and state laws identifying which
citizens were not considered white); Gross, supra note 104, at 177-78; Jones,
supra note 61, at 1487, 1495-96 & nn.25-26; see also infra note 122.





n122.  See, e.g., Okla. Const. of 1907, art. XXIII, § 11; Ala. Code tit. 1, § 2
(1940); Ark. Stat. Ann. § 41-808 (1947); Fla. Stat. Ann. § 1.01 (1941); Ga. Code
Ann. §§79-103, 53-312 (1935); Tenn. Code. Ann. § 25 (1934); Tex. Stat. Ann. art.
2900 (1947); Tex. Penal Code Ann. art. 493, art. 1661, § 2 (1947); Va. Code Ann.
§ 1-14 (1950); Asher v. Huffman, 174 S.W.2d 424, 425 (Ky. 1943) (interpreting
the Kentucky Constitution to define white and colored children); Lee v. New
Orleans Great N. R.R., 51 So. 182, 183 (La. 1910) (defining "colored persons");
Moreau v. Grandich, 75 So. 434, 435 (Miss. 1917) (construing provisions of the
Mississippi Constitution to define a "colored" person); see also Lopez, supra
note 121, at 83; Packard, supra note 105, at 98; Jones, supra note 61, at
1503-11. See generally Murray, supra note 105 (providing an overview of the
antidiscrimination and segregation laws of the fifty states); Christine B.
Hickman, The Devil and the One Drop Rule: Racial Categories, African Americans,
and the U.S. Census, 95 Mich. L. Rev. 1161 (1997); Daniel J. Sharfstein,
Crossing the Color Line: Racial Migration and the One-Drop Rule, 1600-1860, 91
Minn. L. Rev. 592 (2007).





n123.  See, e.g., N.C. Const. of 1875, art. XIV, § 8 (prohibiting interracial
marriage, including a "person of Negro descent to the third generation"); Md.
Code Ann. art. 27, § 445 (1939) (prohibiting interracial marriages as well as
marriages to descendants of certain races "to the third generation").





n124.  See An Act to Preserve Racial Integrity, ch. 371, § 5, 1924 Va. Acts 534,
535 (repealed 1975), invalidated in part by Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1
(1967); see also Richard B. Sherman, "The Last Stand": The Fight for Racial
Integrity in Virginia in the 1920s, 54 J. Southern Hist. 69, 70-71 (1988).





n125.  An Act to Preserve Racial Integrity § 5.





n126.  Kevin Noble Maillard, The Pocahontas Exception: The Exemption of American
Indian Ancestry from Racial Purity Law, 12 Mich. J. Race & L. 351, 369 (2007).





n127.  Id. at 369-70.





n128.  Registration of Birth and Color, 1924, Educ. @ Libr. Va.,
http://edu.lva.virginia.gov/online_classroom/shaping_
the_constitution/doc/birth_registration [https://perma.cc/CSV7-EDX4] (last
visited Oct. 16, 2017) (making available Form 59-3-17-24-65M, titled
"Registration of Birth and Color-Virginia").





n129.  See, e.g., Packard, supra note 105, at 94-100.





n130.  See, e.g., Kitty Calavita, The Paradoxes of Race, Class, Identity, and
"Passing": Enforcing the Chinese Exclusion Acts, 1882-1910, 25 L. & Soc. Inquiry
1, 26 (2000); Andrew M. Carlon, Racial Adjudication, 2007 BYU L. Rev. 1151,
1169-70; Jones, supra note 61, at 1495-97. David Lyon points out that
classification (or categorization) is also an essential part of "all modern
social institutions." David Lyon, Surveillance as Social Sorting: Computer Codes
and Mobile Bodies, in Surveillance as Social Sorting: Privacy, Risk, and Digital
Discrimination 13, 21 (David Lyon ed., 2003).





n131.  See, e.g., Akhil Reed Amar, Becoming Lawyers in the Shadow of Brown, 40
Washburn L.J. 1, 10-11 (2000); Calavita, supra note 130, at 10-11, 15-17, 20-23;
Christopher A. Ford, Administering Identity: The Determination of "Race" in
Race-Conscious Law, 82 Calif. L. Rev. 1231, 1274-75 (1994). For a discussion of
what constitutes a government racial classification, see generally Stephen
Menendian, What Constitutes a "Racial Classification?": Equal Protection
Doctrine Scrutinized, 24 Temp. Pol. & C.R.L. Rev. 81 (2014).





n132.  See, e.g., Jim Fussell, Prevent Genocide Int'l, Presentation to the
Seminar Series of the Yale University Genocide Studies Program (Nov. 15, 2001),
http://genocidewatch.org/images/AboutGen_ Group_Classification_on_National_ID_
Cards.pdf [https://perma.cc/TN5V-TJLC].





n133.  See supra notes 121-28 and accompanying text; see also Ford, supra note
131, at 1274-75.





n134.  See, e.g., Keith Breckenridge, Verwoerd's Bureau of Proof: Total
Information in the Making of Apartheid, 59 Hist. Workshop J. 83, 90 (2005);
Carlon, supra note 130, at 1170; Ford, supra note 131, at 1276-79; Paul N.
Edwards & Gabrielle Hecht, History and the Technopolitics of Identity: The Case
of Apartheid South Africa, 36 J. S. Afr. Stud. 619, 625-28 (2010).





n135.  See, e.g., Philip Gourevitch, We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will
Be Killed with Our Families: Stories from Rwanda 55-58 (1998); Fussell, supra
note 132, at 1; Helen M. Hintjens, When Identity Becomes a Knife: Reflecting on
the Genocide in Rwanda, 1 Ethnicities 25, 30-31 (2001).





n136.  Marion A. Kaplan, Between Dignity and Despair: Jewish Life in Nazi
Germany 77-79 (1999); David Bankier, Hitler and the Policy-Making Process on the
Jewish Question, 3 Holocaust & Genocide Stud. 1, 14 (1988); Fussell, supra note
132, at 1. Scholarship has linked the Nuremburg laws to Jim Crow laws from the
American South. See James Q. Whitman, Hitler's American Model: The United States
and the Making of Nazi Race Law 103-04 (2017).





n137.  See supra notes 104-20 and accompanying text.





n138.  See Ford, supra note 131, at 1275; Jones, supra note 61, at 1496 n.26;
supra notes 121-24 and accompanying text.





n139.  Ford, supra note 131, at 1275-76; Harris, supra note 105, at 187-90;
Jones, supra note 61, at 1496 n.26.





n140.  See supra Part I.A; see also Lyon, supra note 130, at 13 ("Abstract data,
now including video, biometric, and genetic as well as computerized
administrative files, are manipulated to produce profiles and risk categories in
a liquid, networked system. The point is to plan, predict, and prevent by
classifying and assessing those profiles and risks.").





n141.  See, e.g., David Lyon, James B. Rule & Etienne Combet, Identity Cards:
Social Sorting by Database, Oxford Internet Inst. Internet Issue, Nov. 2004, at
2; Daniel J. Steinbock, National Identity Cards: Fourth and Fifth Amendment
Issues, 56 Fla. L. Rev. 697, 699 (2004).





n142.  Lyon, supra note 130, at 21 ("The individualization of risk thus fosters
ever-spiraling levels of surveillance, implying that automated categorization
occurs with increasing frequency.").





n143.  See supra notes 121-28 and accompanying text.





n144.  See, e.g., Margaret Hu, From the National Surveillance State to the
Cybersurveillance State, 13 Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. (forthcoming 2017); Jeremy
Scahill & Glenn Greenwald, The NSA's Secret Role in the U.S. Assassination
Program, Intercept (Feb. 10, 2014, 12:03 AM),
https://theintercept.com/2014/02/10/the-nsas-secret-role/
[https://perma.cc/Z32Z-4TZ6].





n145.  See, e.g., Utah v. Strieff, 136 S. Ct. 2056, 2070-71 (2016) (Sotomayor,
J., dissenting); Florida v. Riley, 488 U.S. 445, 456-67 (1989) (Brennan, J.,
dissenting); United States v. White, 401 U.S. 745, 792-93 (1971) (White, J.,
dissenting); Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616, 630 (1886); Anthony G.
Amsterdam, Perspectives on the Fourth Amendment, 58 Minn. L. Rev. 349, 403
(1974); Jack M. Balkin, The Constitution in the National Surveillance State, 93
Minn. L. Rev. 1, 17-18 (2008); Jack M. Balkin & Sanford Levinson, The Processes
of Constitutional Change: From Partisan Entrenchment to the National
Surveillance State, 75 Fordham L. Rev. 489, 490 (2006); Christopher Slobogin,
Panvasive Surveillance, Political Process Theory, and the Nondelegation
Doctrine, 102 Geo. L.J. 1721, 1775-76 (2014); Christopher Slobogin, Public
Privacy: Camera Surveillance of Public Places and the Right to Anonymity, 72
Miss. L.J. 213, 251 (2002).





n146.  136 S. Ct. 2056 (2016).





n147.  Id. at 2070-71 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). Strieff addressed whether the
discovery of a valid arrest warrant was sufficiently attenuating such that
evidence discovered during an initially unconstitutional investigatory stop was
admissible.  Id. at 2059 (majority opinion).





n148.  857 F.3d 554 (4th Cir.), cert. granted, 137 S. Ct. 2080 (2017).





n149.  Id. at 612 (Wynn, J., concurring).





n150.  60 U.S. 393 (1857).





n151.  323 U.S. 214 (1944).





n152.  Int'l Refugee Assistance Project, 857 F.3d at 612 (Wynn, J., concurring).





n153.  See id. at 591-92 (majority opinion) (discussing the evidence that
"national security is not the true reason for EO-2," including statements made
by Trump as a candidate, statements made by his advisors after he assumed
office, and the issuance of both the first and second Executive Orders); see
also id. at 613 (Wynn, J., concurring) ("The Executive Order here relies on
national origin as a proxy for discrimination based on religious animus ... .").





n154.  See id. at 596 (majority opinion) (citing internal reports from the
Department of Homeland Security and an amicus brief from former national
security officials that concluded that nationality-based screening is an
ineffective means of determining terroristic threat).





n155.  Lizza, supra note 65.





n156.  See supra Part II.B.





n157.  See supra Part II.B.





n158.  See supra Parts II.A-B.





n159.  See Kennedy, supra note 105, at 206.





n160.  See, e.g., Margaret Hu, Big Data Blacklisting, 67 Fla. L. Rev. 1735, 1759
(2015).





n161.  Id.





n162.  See, e.g., Shanti Gomatam & Michael D. Larsen, Record Linkage and
Counterterrorism, 17 Chance 1, 25-29 (2004).





n163.  See supra Introduction; see also Vacca, supra note 37, at 589 (stating
that biometrics is "the science of automatic identification or identity
verification of individuals using physiological or behavioral characteristics").





n164.  Michael D. Larsen, Record Linkage, Nondisclosure, Counterterrorism, and
Statistics, Stat. Soc. Can. (May 2006),
https://ssc.ca/sites/ssc/files/survey/documents/SSC2006_ Michael_Larsen.pdf
[https://perma.cc/P3ZF-8URC] (explaining that record linkage seeks to identify
records that belong to the same individual).





n165.  Id.





n166.  See supra note 51 and accompanying text.





n167.  See supra Part II.A.





n168.  See supra Part II.A.





n169.  See, e.g., Gomatam & Larsen, supra note 162.





n170.  See, e.g, supra note 54 and accompanying text.





n171.  See generally Margaret Hu, Small Data Surveillance v. Big Data
Cybersurveillance, 42 Pepp. L. Rev. 773 (2015).





n172.  See Jonah Engel Bromwich et al., Police Use Surveillance Tool to Scan
Social Media, A.C.L.U. Says, N.Y. Times (Oct. 11, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/12/technology/
aclu-facebook-twitter-instagram-geofeedia.html [https://perma.cc/C2TJ-NCWX];
Matthew Cagle, Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter Provided Data Access for a
Surveillance Product Marketed to Target Activists of Color, ACLU: Free Future
(Oct. 11, 2016, 11:15 AM),
https://www.aclu.org/blog/free-future/facebook-instagram-and-twitter-provided-da
ta-access-surveillance-product-marketed [https://perma.cc/7X44-WEPA]; Ally
Marotti, Chicago Police Used Geofeedia, the TweetDeck for Cops Under Fire from
ACLU, Chi. Trib. (Oct. 13, 2016),
http://www.chicagotribune.com/bluesky/originals/ct-geofeedia-police-surveillance
-reports-bsi-20161013-story.html [https://perma.cc/ 566Y-HBZK]; Nicole Ozer,
Police Use of Social Media Surveillance Software Is Escalating, and Activists
Are in the Digital Crosshairs, ACLU: Free Future (Sept. 22, 2016, 2:45 PM),
https://www.aclu.org/blog/free-future/police-use-social-media-surveillance-softw
are-escalating-and-activists-are-digital [https://perma.cc/NG4Y-GD33].





n173.  Hu, supra note 160, at 1761-62.





n174.  See generally United States v. Esquivel-Rios, 725 F.3d 1231 (10th Cir.
2013); Joshua A.T. Fairfield & Erik Luna, Digital Innocence, 99 Cornell L. Rev.
981 (2014); Hu, supra note 160.





n175.  163 U.S. 537 (1896), overruled by Brown v. Bd. of Educ., 347 U.S. 483
(1954).





n176.  Id. at 559.





n177.  See Tischauser, supra note 105, at 1.





n178.  See supra Part II.A.





n179.  See supra Part II.A.





n180.  See supra note 159 and accompanying text.





n181.  See supra Part II.A.





n182.  See supra note 128 and accompanying text (discussing Form 59-3-17-24-65M,
titled "Registration of Birth and Color-Virginia").





n183.  See generally supra Parts II.A-B.





n184.  See Hu, supra note 160, at 1743.





n185.  Id. at 1746.





n186.  See infra note 227 and accompanying text; see also David Cole, The
Difference Prevention Makes: Regulating Preventive Justice, 9 Crim. L. & Phil.
501, 504 (2014); Jennifer C. Daskal, Pre-Crime Restraints: The Explosion of
Targeted, Noncustodial Prevention, 99 Cornell L. Rev. 327, 331 (2014).





n187.  Emerging facial recognition technology can capture digital photos and
screen for "soft biometrics" that include data relevant to the classification of
protected individuals - such as identifying ethnicity and skin color. See Noah
Shachtman, Army Tracking Plan: Drones That Never Forget a Face, Wired (Sept. 28,
2011, 6:30 AM), https://www.wired.com/2011/09/drones-never-forget-a-face/
[https://perma.cc/8HLQ-TFJ4] ("The key [to more advanced facial recognition
technology] is a kind of digital stereotyping. Using a series of so-called "soft
biometrics' - everything from age to gender to "ethnicity' to "skin color' to
height and weight - the system can keep track of targets "at ranges that are
impossible to do with facial recognition' ... ."); see also Simone Browne, Dark
Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness 110 (2015) ("Digital epidermalization
[through biometric recognition technologies] is the exercise of power cast by
the disembodied gaze of certain surveillance technologies (for example, identity
card readers and e-passport verification machines) that can be employed to do
the work of alienating the subject by producing a truth about the racial body
and one's identity (or identities) despite the subject's claims.").





n188.  See supra Part I.





n189.  Id.





n190.  Important scholarship and research is underway on the topics of
algorithmic governance, and algorithmic fairness and transparency. See generally
Mike Ananny & Kate Crawford, Seeing Without Knowing: Limitations of the
Transparency Ideal and Its Application to Algorithmic Accountability, New Media
& Soc'y, Dec. 13, 2016; Omer Tene & Jules Polonetsky, Taming the Golem:
Challenges of Ethical Algorithmic Decision Making, 19 N.C. J.L. & Tech.
(forthcoming 2017), https://ssrn.com/abstract=2981466
[https://perma.cc/HTN5-24SG]; Solon Barocas et al., Governing Algorithms: A
Provocation Piece (2013) (unpublished manuscript),
http://edshare.soton.ac.uk/8849/31/48-Governing-Algorithms.pdf
[https://perma.cc/R9R9-N4HW]; Harry Surden, Values Embedded in Legal Artificial
Intelligence (Mar. 13, 2017) (unpublished manuscript),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2932333 [https://perma.cc/ZD8K-JA3G].





n191.  See generally Cathy O'Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction (2016) (providing
examples of discrimination from the use of predictive modeling in a variety of
settings); Frank Pasquale, The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That
Control Money and Information (2015); Anupam Chander, The Racist Algorithm?, 115
Mich. L. Rev. 1023 (2017); Tal Zarsky, Transparency in Data Mining: From Theory
to Practice, in Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society: Data
Mining and Profiling in Large Databases 301 (Bart Custers et al. eds., 2013);
Joshua A. Kroll et al., Accountable Algorithms, 165 U. Pa. L. Rev. 633 (2017);
Claire Cain Miller, Algorithms and Bias: Q. and A. with Cynthia Dwork, N.Y.
Times (Aug. 10, 2015),
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/11/upshot/algorithms-and-bias-q-and-a-with-cynth
ia-dwork.html [https://perma.cc/93EH-9G5N] ("Cynthia Dwork, a computer scientist
at Microsoft Research in Silicon Valley ... discussed how algorithms learn to
discriminate, who's responsible when they do, and the trade-offs between
fairness and privacy."); Lauren Weber & Elizabeth Dwoskin, Are Workplace
Personality Tests Fair?, Wall St. J. (Sept. 29, 2014),
https://www.wsj.com/articles/are-workplace-personality-tests-fair-1412044257
[https://perma.cc/3GUY-F7ZP].





n192.  Ravi Kalakota, Making Money on Predictive Analytics - Tools, Consulting
and Content, Bus. Analytics 3.0 (Mar. 18, 2012),
https://practicalanalytics.co/2012/03/18
/making-money-on-predictive-analytics-tools-consulting-and-content/
[https://perma.cc/LBV3-N9BL].





n193.  See generally O'Neil, supra note 191; David Robinson et al., Civil
Rights, Big Data, and Our Algorithmic Future (2014); Solon Barocas & Andrew D.
Selbst, Big Data's Disparate Impact, 104 Calif. L. Rev. 671 (2016); Julia Angwin
et al., Machine Bias, ProPublica (May 23, 2016),
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sen
tencing [https://perma.cc/EM5U-ZNTA]; Miller, supra note 191.





n194.  See infra notes 327-33 and accompanying text.





n195.  See Big Data: Seizing Opportunities, Preserving Values, White House 5
(2014), https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/
20150204_Big_Data_Seizing_Opportunities_ Preserving_Values_Memo.pdf
[https://perma.cc/R9S9-S9HB].





n196.  See Pasquale, supra note 191, at 101-03 (describing private credit
scoring regimes and computerization of the finance sector); Danielle Keats
Citron & Frank Pasquale, The Scored Society: Due Process for Automated
Predictions, 89 Wash. L. Rev. 1, 3-4 (2014) (discussing algorithmic and scoring
systems implemented by various individuals or companies that use data to make
decisions on characterizing a person in numerous aspects of society).





n197.  See Hu, supra note 160.





n198.  Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of
Colorblindness (rev. ed. 2012).





n199.  Id. at 47-58, 185-86.





n200.  Id. at 87-93.





n201.  See generally id.





n202.  Id. at 58.





n203.  Id. at 21 ("Any candid observer of American racial history must
acknowledge that racism is highly adaptable. The rules and reasons the political
system employs to enforce status relations of any kind, including racial
hierarchy, evolve and change as they are challenged.").





n204.  Id. at 240-45.





n205.  Id. at 184 ("In the system of mass incarceration, a wide variety of laws,
institutions, and practices - ranging from racial profiling to biased sentencing
policies, political disenfranchisement, and legalized employment discrimination
- trap African Americans in a virtual (and literal) cage."); see also Erin
Murphy, Paradigms of Restraint, 57 Duke L.J. 1321, 1328 (2008).





n206.  See Browne, supra note 187, at 110; Andrew Guthrie Ferguson, Big Data and
Predictive Reasonable Suspicion, 163 U. Pa. L. Rev. 327, 329 n.6 (2015).





n207.  Reva B. Siegel, From Colorblindness to Antibalkanization: An Emerging
Ground of Decision in Race Equality Cases, 120 Yale L.J. 1278, 1282 (2011)
(contending that equality law can and should strive toward "vindicating
antibalkanization - rather than colorblindness - values").





n208.  Id. at 1281.





n209.  Id. at 1338-42 (explaining that disparate-impact theories of
discrimination are more currently and directly recognized by equality
jurisprudence established under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964). See
generally Michael Omi & Howard Winant, Racial Formation in the United States (3d
ed. 2015); Reva B. Siegel, Why Equal Protection No Longer Protects: The Evolving
Forms of Status-Enforcing State Action, 49 Stan. L. Rev. 1111 (1997).





n210.  Jack M. Balkin, Constitutional Redemption: Political Faith in an Unjust
World 139-73 (2011).





n211.  Id. at 163 ("The model of scrutiny rules declares unconstitutional a set
of delegitimated state practices of race discrimination that were associated
with Jim Crow in the South, but it does not abolish all forms of racial
inequality or social stratification. Rather, the model of scrutiny rules
develops alongside new forms of racial and social stratification produced in the
post-civil rights era."); see also Reva B. Siegel, Discrimination in the Eyes of
the Law: How "Color Blindness" Discourse Disrupts and Rationalizes Social
Stratification, 88 Calif. L. Rev. 77, 83 (2000) (describing a process of
"preservation-through-transformation" whereby the law adapts to protect new
forms of social stratification).





n212.  Balkin, supra note 210, at 145-46 (citing Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S.
537, 551-52 (1896), overruled by Brown v. Bd. of Educ., 347 U.S. 483 (1954)).





n213.  Id. at 144-46.





n214.  Id. at 140.





n215.  Id. 144-48 (describing a "tripartite theory" of divided rights and
equality that recognized three categories: "civil, political, and social").
Plessy did not attempt to extend political or social equality rights under the
Fourteenth Amendment. Id.





n216.  Plessy, 163 U.S. at 550-51.





n217.  See generally supra Part II.A.





n218.  See Primus, supra note 26, at 504-09.





n219.  See Balkin & Levinson, supra note 145, at 521. Balkin and Levinson define
the "National Surveillance State" as being "characterized by a significant
increase in government investments in technology and government bureaucracies
devoted to promoting domestic security and (as its name implies) gathering
intelligence and surveillance using all of the devices that the digital
revolution allows." Id. at 520-21; see also Balkin, supra note 145, at 3.





n220.  Balkin & Levinson, supra note 145, at 520.





n221.  Id. at 523.





n222.  Daniel J. Solove, The Digital Person: Technology and Privacy in the
Information Age 1 (2004); see also Julie E. Cohen, Configuring the Networked
Self: Law, Code, and the Play of Everyday Practice 1 (2012).





n223.  See generally Kitchin, supra note 32; Mayer-Schonberger & Cukier, supra
note 32; Evgeny Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of
Technological Solutionism (2013); danah boyd & Kate Crawford, Critical Questions
for Big Data: Provocations for a Cultural, Technological, and Scholarly
Phenomenon, 15 Info. Comm. & Soc'y 662 (2012); Citron & Pasquale, supra note
196; Hu, supra note 171; Omer Tene & Jules Polonetsky, Privacy in the Age of Big
Data: A Time for Big Decisions, 64 Stan. L. Rev. Online 63 (2012).





n224.  See Seth Fletcher, How to Think About Privacy: An Interview with Jason
Lanier, Sci. Am. (Nov. 1, 2013),
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/lanier-interview-how-to-think-about-p
rivacy/ [https://perma.cc/AJ5J-5MVT].





n225.  See Murphy, supra note 205, at 1358.





n226.  See Ferguson, supra note 206, at 336; Elizabeth E. Joh, Policing by
Numbers: Big Data and the Fourth Amendment, 89 Wash. L. Rev. 35, 42-48, 56
(2014).





n227.  See Ian Kerr, Prediction, Pre-emption, Presumption: The Path of Law After
the Computational Turn, in Privacy, Due Process and the Computational Turn: The
Philosophy of Law Meets the Philosophy of Technology 91, 93 (Mireille
Hildebrandt & Katja de Vries eds., 2013); see also Cole, supra note 186, at 518;
Daskal, supra note 186, at 328.





n228. " Flying While Muslim': Profiling Fears After Arabic Speaker Removed from
Plane, NPR (Apr. 20, 2016),
http://www.npr.org/2016/04/20/475015239/flying-while-muslim-profiling-fears-afte
r-arabic-speaker-removed-from-plane [https://perma.cc/K6CS-3DA3].





n229.  The plaintiffs in Latif v. Holder included many military-age Muslim
males, many of whom are U.S. citizens who served in the U.S. military. See,
e.g., First Amended Complaint at 1, Ibrahim v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., 62 F.
Supp. 3d 909 (N.D. Cal. 2014) (No. 3:06-00545-WHA), 2006 WL 2330786.





n230.  Ibrahim was under surveillance by the FBI, allegedly because she was
Muslim. See Ibrahim, 62 F. Supp. 3d at 916-17, 929.





n231.  See generally Balkin & Levinson, supra note 145.





n232.  Cass R. Sunstein, Public Values, Private Interests, and the Equal
Protection Clause, 1982 Sup. Ct. Rev. 127, 127; see also United States v.
Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996); Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438
U.S. 265, 290-91 (1978); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 686-87 (1973)
(plurality opinion) (Brennan, J.); Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 11 (1967);
Brown v. Bd. of Educ., 347 U.S. 483, 493 (1954); Bertrall L. Ross II & Su Li,
Measuring Political Power: Suspect Class Determinations and the Poor, 104 Calif.
L. Rev. 323, 324-26 (2016) (discussing evolution of suspect classifications and
more exacting judicial levels of scrutiny for specific groups deemed protected
under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment).





n233.  Sunstein, supra note 232, at 127-28.





n234.  See infra notes 235-40 and accompanying text.





n235.  62 F. Supp. 3d 909 (N.D. Cal. 2014).





n236.  28 F. Supp. 3d 1134 (D. Or. 2014).





n237.  Latif v. Holder, 686 F.3d 1122, 1126 (9th Cir. 2012).





n238.  The Supreme Court has recognized both a right to "freedom of movement"
and a right to international travel. See, e.g., Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116,
125-26 (1958).





n239.  Complaint at 50-51, Latif, 28 F. Supp. 3d 1134 (No. 10-CV-750-BR).





n240.  First Amended Complaint at 11-12, Ibrahim, 62 F. Supp. 3d 909 (No.
C06-0545 WHA), 2006 WL 2330786.





n241.  424 U.S. 319 (1976).





n242.  See id. at 335.





n243.  Latif, 28 F. Supp. 3d at 1147-48.





n244.  Id. at 1152.





n245.  Id. at 1160-61.





n246.  See Defendants' Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment at 18, Latif, 28 F.
Supp. 3d 1134 (No. 3:10-cv-00750-BR), 2015 WL 11347548 (arguing that the No Fly
List is designed to make a "predictive judgment" of potential threats).





n247.  See id.





n248.  Various plaintiffs have alleged in litigation that constitutional harms
arise from big data watchlisting and dataveillance or cybersurveillance
targeting systems, including database screening systems. See, e.g., Latif v.
Holder, 686 F.3d 1122, 1124, 1126 (9th Cir. 2012) (noting that plaintiffs
alleged due process violations in relation to the No Fly List); Afifi v. Lynch,
101 F. Supp. 3d 90, 95-96 (D.D.C. 2015) (noting that plaintiffs alleged Fourth
Amendment violations based on cybersurveillance GPS tracking).





n249.  Richard A. Primus, Canon, Anti-Canon, and Judicial Dissent, 48 Duke L.J.
243, 243 (1998); see also Akhil Reed Amar, Plessy v. Ferguson and the
Anti-Canon, 39 Pepp. L. Rev. 75, 75 (2011); J.M. Balkin & Sanford Levinson, The
Canons of Constitutional Law, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 963, 984-95, 1014-19 (1998);
Jamal Green, The Anticanon, 125 Harv. L. Rev. 379, 379 (2011).





n250.  562 U.S. 134 (2011).





n251.  563 U.S. 582 (2011).





n252.  567 U.S. 387 (2012).





n253.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 142 (challenging whether HSPD-12 that mandates
standardized credentialing for all federal employees and contractors violates a
constitutional right to privacy).





n254.  Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12: Policy for a Common
Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, Dep't Homeland
Security (Aug. 19, 2015), http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/laws/gc_1217616624097.shtm
[https://perma.cc/7G8A-BEZ6].





n255.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 138.





n256.  January 27, 2017, Order, supra note 4, § 1.





n257.  March 6, 2017, Order, supra note 8, § 5(a).





n258.  September 24, 2017, Order, supra note 13.





N259.  Id.





n260.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 151.





n261.  Id. at 138 (quoting Whalen v. Roe, 429 U.S. 589, 599-600 (1977)); see
also Nixon v. Adm'r of Gen. Servs., 433 U.S. 425, 457 (1977).





n262.  Brief of Amici Curiae Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) and
Legal Scholars and Technical Experts in Support of Respondents at 6, Nelson, 562
U.S. 134 (No. 09-530), 2010 WL 3167308.





n263.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 138.





n264.  Id.





n265.  Id. (second alteration in original) (quoting Whalen, 429 U.S. at 599,
605).





n266.  Nelson v. NASA, 506 F.3d 713, 715-16 (9th Cir. 2007).





n267.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 149.





n268.  Form: SF85, U.S. Gen. Services Admin.,
https://www.gsa.gov/portal/forms/download/116378 [https://perma.cc/4JHM-6ESJ].





n269.  Id.





n270.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 143.





n271.  Id. at 143 n.5.





n272.  Id.; see also Agency Hum. Res. Div., Nat'l Aeronotics & Space Admin.,
SREF-30000-0003, NASA Desk Guide for Suitability and Security Clearance
Processing Version 2, at 51 (2008) [hereinafter Nasa Desk Guide],
http://hspd12jpl.org/files/Suitability SecurityDeskGuide.pdf
[https://perma.cc/957P-9PJN].





n273.  Nasa Desk Guide, supra note 272, at 51.





n274.  Id. at 65.





n275.  See Nelson, 562 U.S. at 143 n.5; NASA Desk Guide, supra note 272, at
65-67. The NASA Desk Guide provides this caveat: "Traffic violations not
required to be admitted on OF306 or other application material/QSP will not be
considered issues." NASA Desk Guide, supra note 272, at 67.





n276.  NASA Desk Guide, supra note 272, at 71-93.





n277.  Id.





n278.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 143 n.5.





n279.  See James Risen & Laura Poitras, N.S.A. Collecting Millions of Faces from
Web Images, N.Y. Times (May 31, 2014),
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/nsa-collecting-millions-of-faces-from-web-i
mages.html [https://perma.cc/PQD8-U5DN] (explaining that biometric data can be
combined with "two dozen data points" that include DHS databases and other
federal databases, such as "Transportation Security Administration No Fly List,
[a person's] passport and visa status, known associates or suspected terrorist
ties, and comments made about [an individual] by informants to American
intelligence agencies").





n280.  Christopher Snyder, Trump Doubles Down on Vow to Bar Muslims, Fox News
(Dec. 8, 2015),
http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2015/12/08/trump-calls-for-complete-shutdown-on-
muslims-entering-us.html [https://perma.cc/Q6ZF-8F96].





n281.  See Ali Vitali, At South Carolina Rally, Donald Trump Defiant on Muslim
Ban, NBC News (Dec. 7, 2015),
http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/south-carolina-rally-trump-defiant
-steadfast-muslim-ban-n475951 [https://perma.cc/D3WC-5S56].





n282.  Snyder, supra note 280.





n283.  Amy B. Wang, Trump Asked for a "Muslim Ban,' Giuliani Says - and Ordered
a Commission to Do It "Legally,' Wash. Post (Jan. 29, 2017),
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/01/29/trump-asked-for-a-musl
im-ban-giuliani-says-and-ordered-a-commission-to-do-it-legally/
[https://perma.cc/G7YY-JG5A].





n284.  Id.





n285.  Id.





n286.  847 F.3d 1151 (9th Cir. 2017) (per curiam).





n287.  Id. at 1168.





n288.  Id. at 1168 n.7.





n289.  859 F.3d 741 (9th Cir.) (per curiam), cert. granted, 137 S. Ct. 2080
(2017).





n290.  Id. at 770, 775.





n291.  Int'l Refugee Assistance Project v. Trump, 857 F.3d 554, 591-92 (4th
Cir.), cert. granted, 137 S. Ct. 2080 (2017) ("Plaintiffs also point to the
comparably weak evidence that EO-2 is meant to address national security
interests, including the exclusion of national security agencies from the
decision-making process, the post hoc nature of the national security rationale,
and evidence from DHS that EO-2 would not operate to diminish the threat of
potential terrorist activity.").





n292.  Trump v. Int'l Refugee Assistance Project, 137 S. Ct. 2080, 2086 (2017).
The author reserves for future scholarship further inquiry into and analysis of
the Supreme Court's final disposition and resolution of these matters.





n293.  Vivian Salama & Alicia A. Caldwell, DHS Report Disputes Threat from
Banned Nations, Associated Press (Feb. 24, 2017),
http://bigstory.ap.org/article/39f1f8e4ceed4a30a4570f693291c866/
dhs-intel-report-disputes-threat-posed-travel-ban-nations
[https://perma.cc/Z8NL-8VW6].





n294.  Memorandum from the Dep't of Homeland Sec., Office of Intelligence and
Analysis, Citizenship Likely an Unreliable Indicator of Terrorist Threat to the
United States (2017), https://fas.org/irp/eprint/dhs-7countries.pdf
[https://perma.cc/GKK4-TVG4].





n295.  Salama & Caldwell, supra note 293.





n296.  Id.





n297.  Hawaii v. Trump, 859 F.3d 741, 759, 784 n.23 (9th Cir.) (per curiam),
cert. granted, 137 S. Ct. 2080 (2017); Int'l Refugee Assistance Project v.
Trump, 857 F.3d 554, 575, 591-92, 596 (4th Cir.), cert. granted sub nom.  137 S.
Ct. 2080 (2017).





n298.  January 27, 2017, Order, supra note 4, § 1.





n299.  Michael D. Shear & Helene Cooper, Trump Bars Refugees and Citizens of 7
Muslim Countries, N.Y. Times (Jan. 27, 2017),
www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/us/politics/trump-syrian-refugees.html
[https://perma.cc/6UDJ-QCMR].





n300.  See Schultheis, supra note 99.





n301.  See Mack, Law, Society, Identity, supra note 104, at 394-95 (observing
that de jure discrimination reflected both a shift in law and social rhetoric).





n302.  See generally Sunstein, supra note 232.





n303.  See David Benjamin Oppenheimer, Martin Luther King, Walker v. City of
Birmingham, and the Letter from Birmingham Jail, 26 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 791, 796
(1993) ("Shortly before King's arrival the bus station manager had been jailed
for permitting African American passengers to use the white waiting room."); see
also Tom R. Tyler, Why People Obey the Law 21 (1990) ("Social control refers
specifically to altering citizens' behavior by manipulating access to valued
social resources or by delivering or threatening to deliver sanctions.").





n304.  Harris, supra note 105, at 187, 207 (citing 1890 La. Acts 111).





n305.  Higginbotham, supra note 105, at 88.





n306.  Harris, supra note 105, at 212-13.





n307.  Id. at 212.





n308.  Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-603, 100 Stat.
3359 (codified in scattered sections of 8 U.S.C.).





n309.  See 8 U.S.C.§§1324a (2012).





n310.  Id.





n311.  Studies by the U.S. Government Accountability Office found that the
employer sanctions provision of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
had resulted in widespread discrimination. See, e.g., U.S. Gov't Accountability
Office, GAO/T-GGD-92-21, IRCA-Related Discrimination: Actions Have Been Taken to
Address IRCA-Related Discrimination, but More is Needed 2 (1992),
http://www.gao.gov/products/T-GGD-92-21 [https://perma.cc/9UV4-7M45]; U.S. Gov't
Accountability Office, GAO/T-GGD-90-51, IRCA Anti-Discrimination Amendments of
1990, at 3 (1990), http://www.gao.gov/products/T-GGD-90-51
[https://perma.cc/CU9N-8LYS].





n312.  Editorial, Clocking Immigration Sanctions, Wall St. J., Apr. 16, 1990, at
A12.





n313.  See Motomura, supra note 62, at 1361; Michael J. Wishnie, Laboratories of
Bigotry?: Devolution of the Immigration Power, Equal Protection, and Federalism,
76 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 493, 513-14 & nn.106-10 (2001); see also Stephen Lee, Private
Immigration Screening in the Workplace, 61 Stan. L. Rev. 1103, 1130 (2009);
Huyen Pham, The Private Enforcement of Immigration Laws, 96 Geo. L.J. 777,
780-81 (2008).





n314.  See Hiroshi Motomura, The Curious Evolution of Immigration Law:
Procedural Surrogates for Substantive Constitutional Rights, 92 Colum. L. Rev.
1625, 1632 (1992). The Supreme Court has recognized potential due process claims
of persons in the United States who are noncitizens including those present
unlawfully. See Kerry v. Din, 135 S. Ct. 2128, 2133-34 (2015); Zadvydas v.
Davis, 533 U.S. 678, 692-95 (2001); Landon v. Plasencia, 459 U.S. 21, 33-34
(1982); Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753, 762-65 (1972).





n315.  See 8 U.S.C. § 1324b(a)(3)(B) (2012) (restricting certain protections
under the antidiscrimination provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act to
those immigrants with lawful permanent residence status).





n316.  Reply in Support of Emergency Motion for Stay Pending Appeal at 5,
Washington v. Trump, 847 F.3d 1151 (9th Cir. 2017) (per curiam) (No. 17-35105),
2017 WL 492504.





n317.  See U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO/T-GGD-90-51, IRC A
Anti-Discrimination Amendments of 1990, supra note 311, at 3.





n318.  Id.





n319.  Id.





n320.  Id.; see also Cheryl I. Harris, Whiteness as Property, 106 Harv. L. Rev.
1707, 1725 (1993).





n321.  See Basic Pilot Program Extension and Expansion Act of 2003, Pub. L. No.
108-156, 117 Stat. 1944 (codified at 8 U.S.C. §§1101, 1324a (2012)) (authorizing
the development of the "basic pilot program for employment eligibility
verification" to implement a technologically improved method to screen
immigrants).





n322.  See id.





n323.  Id. § 3(b)(b)(1) ("Evaluating whether the problems identified by the
report submitted under subsection (a) have been substantially resolved ... .");
id. § 3(b)(b)(2) ("Describing what actions the Secretary of Homeland Security
shall take before undertaking the expansion of the basic pilot program to all 50
States in accordance with section 401(c)(1), in order to resolve any outstanding
problems raised in the report filed under subsection (a).").





n324.  See Press Release, Transp. Sec. Admin., TSA to Test New Passenger
Pre-Screening System (Aug. 26, 2004),
http://www.tsa.gov/press/releases/2004/08/26/tsa-test-new-passenger-pre-screenin
g-system [https://perma.cc/8RRW-8L9P] (describing the implementation of a
post-9/11 passenger prescreening program that checks passengers' names against
terrorist watchlists in an effort to improve the use of "no fly" lists).





n325.  The 9/11 Commission Report, for example, emphasized the need to
incorporate biometric data into identity-management tools and systems in order
to augment border security and national security objectives. Nat'l Comm'n on
Terrorist Attacks upon the U.S., The 9/11 Commission Report 385-92 (2004),
http://www.9-11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf [https://perma.cc/RT32-JKEZ]
("Linking biometric passports to good data systems and decision-making is a
fundamental goal.").





n326.  See Simson Garfinkel, Database Nation: The Death of Privacy in the 21st
Century 37-67 (2000); Kelly A. Gates, Our Biometric Future: Facial Recognition
Technology and the Culture of Surveillance 1-2 (2011) ("The suggestion that an
automated facial recognition system may have helped avert the September 11
terrorist attacks was perhaps the most ambitious claim circulating about
biometric identification technologies in the aftermath of the catastrophe.");
Anil K. Jain et al., Introduction to Biometrics vii (2011) ("The deployment of
biometric systems has been gaining momentum over the last two decades in both
public and private sectors. These developments have been fueled in part by
recent [post-9/11] government mandates stipulating the use of biometrics for
ensuring reliable delivery of various services."). See generally Jennifer Lynch,
From Fingerprints to DNA: Biometric Data Collection in U.S. Immigrant
Communities and Beyond (2012); Laura K. Donohue, Technological Leap, Statutory
Gap, and Constitutional Abyss: Remote Biometric Identification Comes of Age, 97
Minn. L. Rev. 407 (2012); Hu, supra note 52.





n327.  49 U.S.C. § 44903 (2012); 49 C.F.R. pts. 1540, 1544, 1560 (2016).





n328.  E-Verify is a "test pilot" program jointly operated by DHS and the Social
Security Administration that enables employers to screen employees' personally
identifiable data (e.g., name, birth date, and Social Security number) through
government databases over the internet in order to "verify" the identity of the
employee. U.S. Citizenship & Immigr. Servs., Dep't of Homeland Sec., E-Verify
User Manual for Employers 1 (2014),
http://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/files/nativedocuments/
E-Verify_Manual.pdf [https://perma.cc/DB3D-P3MQ]. E-Verify is referred to as the
"Basic Pilot Program" in the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA) and in subsequent congressional action
extending its funding. Id. at 77-78; see also Basic Pilot Program Extension and
Expansion Act of 2003, Pub. L. No. 108-156, 117 Stat. 1944 (codified at 8 U.S.C.
§§1101, 1324a (2012)); Basic Pilot Extension Act of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107-128,
115 Stat. 2407 (2002) (codified at 8 U.S.C.§§1101, 1324a). For a thorough
discussion of E-Verify and its legal implications, see generally Juliet P.
Stumpf, Getting to Work: Why Nobody Cares About E-Verify (And Why They Should),
2 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 381 (2012).





n329.  Secure Communities ("S-COMM") is an interoperability program that
facilitates data sharing and database screening protocols between the FBI, DHS,
and local law enforcement agencies. Important scholarship has addressed multiple
legal issues relating to S-COMM in recent years. See, e.g., Hiroshi Motomura,
Immigration Outside the Law 79-83 (2014). See generally Adam B. Cox & Thomas J.
Miles, Policing Immigration, 80 U. Chi. L. Rev. 87 (2013); Christopher N. Lasch,
Rendition Resistance, 92 N.C. L. Rev. 149 (2013); Thomas J. Miles & Adam B. Cox,
Does Immigration Enforcement Reduce Crime? Evidence from Secure Communities, 57
J.L. & Econ. 937 (2014). DHS explains that S-COMM is justified by a combination
of authorities. See Memorandum from Riah Ramlogan, Deputy Principal Legal
Advisor, to Beth N. Gibson, Assistant Deputy Dir., U.S. Immigr. & Customs Enf't,
U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec. (Oct. 2, 2010),
http://uncoverthetruth.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/Mandatory-in-2013-Memo.pdf
[https://perma.cc/CW98-2Y9G]. The authorities relied upon by DHS include: (1) 28
U.S.C. § 534(a)(1) and (4), which provides the FBI with authority to share
fingerprint data with ICE; (2) 8 U.S.C. § 1722, which mandates the development
of a data-sharing system that "enable(s) intelligence and law enforcement
agencies to determine the inadmissibility or deportability of an [undocumented
immigrant]"; and (3) 42 U.S.C. § 14616, which ratifies information or database
sharing between federal and state agencies. Id. at 4-6.





n330.  The DHS Prioritized Enforcement Program (PEP) was announced by DHS
Secretary Jeh Johnson on November 20, 2014, to replace the S-COMM program;
however, it appears that the database screening protocols of S-COMM will remain
intact under PEP. See Memorandum from Jeh Charles Johnson, Sec'y, Dep't of
Homeland Sec., to Thomas S. Winkowski, Acting Director, Immigr. & Customs Enf't
2 (Nov. 20, 2014), http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/14_
1120_memo_secure_communities.pdf [https://perma.cc/SCL3-Z7YX]. On February 20,
2017, former DHS Secretary John Kelly signed an implementation memo announcing
that S-COMM would be reinstated and PEP would be rescinded. See Memorandum from
John Kelly, Sec'y of Homeland Sec., to Kevin McAleenan, Acting Comm'r, U.S.
Customs & Border Prot., Enforcement of the Immigration Laws to Serve the
National Interest (Feb. 20, 2017), https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/17_0220_S1_Enforcement-of-the-Immigration-Laws-to-Serve-the-Nationa
l-Interest.pdf [https://perma.cc/7SJE-9RS2].





n331.  Stumpf, supra note 328, at 400 n.87 (citing Marc R. Rosenblum, EVerify:
Strengths, Weaknesses, and Proposals for Reform, Migration Pol'y Inst. 5, 7
(2011); Mary D. Fan, Post-Racial Proxies: Resurgent State and Local Anti-"Alien"
Laws and Unity-Rebuilding Frames for Antidiscrimination Values, 32 Cardozo L.
Rev. 905, 923-24, 935-36 (2011); Kati L. Griffith, Discovering "Immployment'
Law: The Constitutionality of Subfederal Immigration Regulation at Work, 29 Yale
L. & Pol'y Rev. 389, 417, 424-26 (2011); Rigel C. Oliveri, Between a Rock and a
Hard Place: Landlords, Latinos, Anti-Illegal Immigrant Ordinances, and Housing
Discrimination, 62 Vand. L. Rev. 55, 116 (2009)).





n332.  In recent years, state election officials have used the Systematic Alien
Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) database screening protocol to conduct
voter purges. See Fatma Marouf, The Hunt for Noncitizen Voters, 65 Stan. L. Rev.
Online 66, 66 (2012). For more information on the SAVE database screening
program, see Dep't of Homeland Sec., Privacy Impact Assessment for the
Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) Program 12 (Aug. 26,
2011), http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_ pia_uscis_save.pdf
[https://perma.cc/7976-2BYA].





n333.  52 U.S.C. § 21083 (2012) (originally enacted as Help America Vote Act of
2002 (HAVA), Pub. L. No. 107-252, 116 Stat. 1666 (2002)). HAVA requires each
state to implement and maintain an electronic database of all registered voters.
Id. HAVA also requires states to verify the identity of the voter registration
application through cross-checking the applicant's driver's license or last four
digits of the applicant's Social Security number. Id. § 21083(a)(5)(A)(i). If
the individual has neither number, the state is required to assign a voter
identification number to the applicant. Id. § 21083(a)(5)(A)(ii). Each state
election office is tasked with overseeing election rules and procedures for that
state in the implementation of HAVA. President Signs H.R. 3295, "Help America
Vote Act of 2002," Soc. Sec. Admin. (Nov. 7, 2002),
http://www.ssa.gov/legislation/legis_bulletin_ 110702.html
[https://perma.cc/5TFK-M4MM].





n334.  See SAVE Database - Issues with Obtaining SSN and Driver's Licenses,
NAFSA, http://www.nafsa.org/findresources/Default.aspx?id=11154
[https://perma.cc/3ZPW-TDFZ] (last visited Oct. 16, 2017).





n335.  See Jennifer M. Chacon, The Transformation of Immigration Federalism, 21
Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 577, 589 (2012); Kobach, supra note 63, at 545;
Christopher N. Lasch, Preempting Immigration Detainer Enforcement Under Arizona
v. United States, 3 Wake Forest J.L. & Pol'y 281, 328 (2013).





n336.  See Memorandum from John Kelly, Sec'y of Homeland Sec., to Kevin
McAleenan, Acting Comm'r, U.S. Customs and Border Prot. et al., Implementing the
President's Border Security and Immigration Enforcement Improvements Policies 4
(Feb. 20, 2017), https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/17_
0220_S1_Implementing-the-Presidents-Border-Security-Immigration-Enforcement-Impr
ovement-Policies.pdf [https://perma.cc/RX6G-GBTM].





n337.  Id.





n338.  See supra note 329 and accompanying text.





n339.  S-COMM involves both civil DHS immigration database screening and FBI
criminal record database screening simultaneously. See supra note 329 and
accompanying text.





n340.  See, e.g., Kevin R. Johnson, A Case Study of Color-Blindness: The
Racially Disparate Impacts of Arizona's S.B. 1070 and the Failure of
Comprehensive Immigration Reform, 2 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 313, 319-20 (2012);
Karla Mari McKanders, Immigration Enforcement and the Fugitive Slave Acts:
Exploring Their Similarities, 61 Cath. U. L. Rev. 921, 947 (2012).





n341.  Beason-Hammon Taxpayer and Citizen Protection Act, No. 2011-535 (2011)
(codified at Ala. Code§§31-13-1 to 31-13-30, 32-6-9 (2017)).





n342.  Richard Fausset, Alabama Enacts Anti-Illegal-Immigration Law Described As
Nation's Strictest, L.A. Times (June 10, 2011),
http://articles.latimes.com/2011/jun/10/nation/la-na-alabama-immigration-2011061
0 [https://perma.cc/3Y6E-4Y3B] (""This draconian initiative signed into law this
morning by Gov. Robert Bentley is so oppressive that even Bull Connor himself
would be impressed,' said Wade Henderson, head of the Leadership Conference on
Civil and Human Rights ... . "HB 56 is designed to do nothing more than
terrorize the state's Latino community.'").





n343.  Kasie Hunt, Dems: Ariz Law Like Jim Crow, Apartheid, Politico (Apr. 28,
2010), http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0410/36503.html
[https://perma.cc/6E8S-SW6E].





n344.  Michael McIntee, AZ Is Our Jim Crow Moment of 21st Century, YouTube (July
24, 2010), http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sAbTzyegrDU
[https://perma.cc/L2MR-TKDZ].





n345.  Id.





n346.  Hunt, supra note 343.





n347.  See Legal Arizona Workers Act, ch. 279, 2007 Ariz. Sess. Laws 1312
(codified at Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§13-2009, 23-211 to 23-214 (2008)).





n348.  Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-603, 100 Stat.
3359 (codified in scattered sections of 8 U.S.C.).





n349.  See supra note 328 and accompanying text.





n350.  Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. 387, 416 (2012). Section 2(B) of SB
1070, which was slightly modified and later codified in the Arizona Revised
Statutes, provides:



   For any lawful stop, detention or arrest made by [an Arizona] law enforcement
official or a law enforcement agency ... in the enforcement of any other law or
ordinance of a county, city or town or this state where reasonable suspicion
exists that the person is an alien and is unlawfully present in the United
States, a reasonable attempt shall be made, when practicable, to determine the
immigration status of the person, except if the determination may hinder or
obstruct an investigation. Any person who is arrested shall have the person's
immigration status determined before the person is released.

 Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 11-1051 (2012).





n351.  S.B. 1611, 50th Leg., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ariz. 2011).





n352.  Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.§§1-501, 1-502 (Supp. 2011).





n353.  S.B. 1405, 50th Leg., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ariz. 2011).





n354.  S.B. 1407, 50th Leg., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ariz. 2011).





n355.  Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 15-802 (Supp. 2011).





n356.  See Fred H. Cate, Government Data Mining: The Need for a Legal Framework,
43 Harv. C.R-C.L.L. Rev. 435, 439-40 (2008).





n357.  Vaughn Hillyard, Donald Trump's Plan for a Muslim Database Draws
Comparison to Nazi Germany, NBC News (Nov. 20, 2015),
http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-says-he-would-certainly-impl
ement-muslim-database-n466716 [https://perma.cc/ RML4-KTZK].





n358.  Id.





n359.  Encyclopedia of Biometrics 1235 (Stan Z. Li & Anil K. Jain eds., 2009).





n360.  See Fed. Trade Comm'n, Data Brokers: A Call for Transparency and
Accountability 56 (2014),
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/data-brokers-call-transparenc
y-accountability-report-federal-trade-commission-
may-2014/140527databrokerreport.pdf [https://perma.cc/G4WC-7NN6].





n361.  See Complaint at 8-9, Latif v. Holder, 28 F. Supp. 3d 1134 (D. Or. 2014)
(No. 10-CV-750-BR).





n362.  See Lee, supra note 313, at 1130; Pham, supra note 313, at 780-81;
Stumpf, supra note 328, at 382.





n363.  See generally Cox & Miles, supra note 329; Lasch, supra note 329.





n364.  See Jennifer M. Chacon, Privatized Immigration Enforcement, 52 Harv.
C.R-C.L.L. Rev. 1, 8 (2017).





n365.  See Hiroshi Motomura, The Rights of Others: Legal Claims and Immigration
Outside the Law, 59 Duke L.J. 1723, 1729 (2010) ("Only after the Civil War did
today's prevailing view of immigration federalism - that federal immigration
regulation displaces any state laws on the admission and expulsion of
noncitizens - begin to emerge.").





n366.  The National Conference of State Legislatures compiles annual reports on
state legislative activity regarding immigration as part of the Immigration
Policy Project. See generally State Laws Related to Immigration and Immigrants,
Nat'l Conf. St. Legislatures (Aug. 6, 2017),
http://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/state-laws-related-to-immigration-and-i
mmigrants.aspx [https://perma.cc/TD2T-5R5F].





n367.  See id.





n368.  Memorandum from John Kelly, supra note 330, at 3.





n369.  Hillyard, supra note 357.





n370.  See Edwin Black, IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between
Nazi Germany and America's Most Powerful Corporation 21 (2001); Aebra Coe,
Ex-Ambassador Wants Ford, IBM Apartheid Liability Reviewed, Law360 (Mar. 21,
2016), https://www.law360.com/articles/773798 [https://perma.cc/G6MR-FL7Z]; Haya
El Nasser, Papers Show Census Role in WWII Camps, USA Today (Mar. 30, 2007),
https://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/2007-03-30-census-role_n.htm
[https://perma.cc/82GL-P5KR]; see also supra notes 132, 134 and accompanying
text.





n371.  See supra notes 253-78 and accompanying text.





n372.  See Ariz. Contractors Ass'n v. Candelaria, 534 F. Supp. 2d 1036, 1061 (D.
Ariz. 2008).





n373.  Id.





n374.  Id.





n375.  Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting, 563 U.S. 582, 594 (2011).





n376.  Valle del Sol v. Whiting, No. CV 10-1061- PHX-SRB, 2012 WL 8021265, at 2
(D. Ariz. Sept. 5, 2012).





n377.  See generally Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S. 387 (2012).





n378.  Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214, 234-35 (1944) (Murphy, J.,
dissenting) ("In excommunicating them without benefit of hearings, this order
also deprives them of all their constitutional rights to procedural due process.
Yet no reasonable relation to an "immediate, imminent, and impending' public
danger is evident to support this racial restriction, which is one of the most
sweeping and complete deprivations of constitutional rights in the history of
this nation in the absence of martial law.").





n379.  William N. Eskridge, Jr., Destabilizing Due Process and Evolutive Equal
Protection, 47 UCLA L. Rev. 1183, 1187 (2000).





n380.  Id. at 1187-88.





n381.  Id. at 1214.





n382.  Id. at 1183.





n383.  Id. at 1210.





n384.  Id.





n385.  Id. at 1216.





n386.  Id.





n387.  Id. ("The Court's apparent classification-based approach offers a
tremendous reward for groups that can persuade judges that the classification
legally defining their group is suspect.").





n388.  Id. at 1216; id. at 1219 ("There may be no deep theoretical or even
historical reason why the Due Process Clause's principles of fairness,
antiarbitrariness, and dignity could not be applied on the wholesale level.").





n389.  Id. at 1186.





n390.  See Pasquale, supra note 191, at 101-03; Danielle Keats Citron,
Technological Due Process, 85 Wash. U. L. Rev. 1249, 1260 (2008); Citron &
Pasquale, supra note 196, at 3-4; Kate Crawford & Jason Schultz, Big Data and
Due Process: Toward a Framework to Redress Predictive Privacy Harms, 55 B.C. L.
Rev. 93, 122 (2014); Hu, supra note 160, at 1759; Daniel J. Steinbock, Data
Matching, Data Mining, and Due Process, 40 Ga. L. Rev. 1, 3 (2005).





n391.  See Puente Ariz. v. Arpaio, 76 F. Supp. 3d 833, 842 (D. Ariz. 2015),
rev'd in part, vacated in part, 821 F.3d 1098 (9th Cir. 2016). In Puente, the
plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of state statutes "that criminalize
the act of identity theft done with the intent to obtain or continue
employment." Id. The state statutes in question required employers to use
E-Verify and included provisions to ensure employers' participation in the
E-Verify program: the "Legal Arizona Workers Act" and "Employment of
Unauthorized Aliens." Id. at 844. The district court preliminarily enjoined the
enforcement of the statutes, finding that the plaintiffs had demonstrated a
likelihood of success on the merits of their equal protection claim.  Id. at
854-56.





n392.  See Arcia v. Fla. Sec'y. of State, 772 F.3d 1335, 1348 (11th Cir. 2014)
(reversing and remanding the district court's grant of judgment as a matter of
law to the Secretary of State of Florida and declaring that the SAVE database
screening program for voter purges were in violation of the 90-day provision of
the National Voter Registration Act).





n393.  Id. The original complaint alleged that the SAVE database screening
program aimed at removing noncitizens from voter registration rolls violated
section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, asserting protection for "citizens ...
having "less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate in
the political process and to elect the representatives of their choice.'"
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief at 18, Arcia v. Detzner, 908 F.
Supp. 2d 1276 (S.D. Fla. 2012), vacated, 2015 WL 11198230 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 12,
2015) (No. 12-22282-CIV), 2012 WL 2308560 (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 1973 (2012)).





n394.  Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, supra note 393, at 2.
The original complaint also alleged that the SAVE database screening program
aimed at removing noncitizens from voter registration rolls violated section
8(b)(1) of the National Voter Registration Act, also known as the "90 Day
Provision," with plaintiffs asserting that the statute "prohibits the systematic
purging of eligible voters from the official voter list for the State of
Florida, within 90 days before the date of a primary or general election for
Federal office." Id.





n395.  See, e.g., Complaint at 1, Galarza v. Szalczyk, No. 10-cv-06815, 2012 WL
1080020 (E.D. Pa. Mar. 30, 2012), 2010 WL 4822758. In the original complaint,
the plaintiff brought an "action under the Fourth, Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and
the authority of Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bureau of
Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388 (1971)." Id. Under the Fifth Amendment, the plaintiff
alleged, "Issuance of an immigration detainer against Plaintiff based on his
Hispanic ethnicity violated his right to be free from discrimination on the
basis of ethnicity under the equal protection clause of the Fifth Amendment."
Id. P 94. Under the Fourteenth Amendment, the plaintiff alleged, "Treating
Plaintiff as presumptively subject to detention and removal as an "alien' on the
basis of his Hispanic identity violated his rights under the equal protection
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment." Id. P 104. The plaintiff also alleged due
process claims under the Fourteenth and Fifth Amendments. Under the Fourteenth
Amendment, the complaint alleges that the defendants



   violated Plaintiffs right to due process of law guaranteed by the Fourteenth
Amendment of the United States Constitution [by]: a) imprisoning Plaintiff
pursuant to a detainer issued on less than probable cause [and]; b) failing to
give Plaintiff notice of and an opportunity to be heard regarding the grounds
for the detainer before imprisoning Plaintiff pursuant to it.

 Id. P 114. Under the Fifth Amendment, the complaint alleged that the defendants
"violated the Fifth Amendment by acting in the following ways: a) violating the
terms of 8 U.S.C. § 1357, as interpreted by the courts, by issuing detainers on
less than probable cause; b) misrepresenting immigration detainers as orders for
mandatory detention contrary to 8 C.F.R. § 287.7(a)." Id. P 100.





n396.  Id. P 90. In the original complaint, the plaintiff also brought an action
under the Fourth Amendment, alleging that "the issuance of the detainer against
Plaintiff occurred without probable cause to believe that he was an "alien'
subject to detention and removal. That issuance constituted an unreasonable
seizure in violation of Plaintiff's rights under the Fourth Amendment." Id.





n397.  See Galarza v. Szalczyk, 745 F.3d 634, 636 (3d Cir. 2014). In Galarza,
the Third Circuit concluded that immigration holds are not mandatory commands,
but rather - per the Tenth Amendment - discretionary for state agencies. Id.
Therefore, the court reasoned, a previously dismissed § 1983 claim against the
county that allegedly held the plaintiff was erroneously dismissed and remanded.
Id. at 645.





n398.  See Ibrahim v. Dep't of Homeland Sec., 62 F. Supp. 3d 909, 914 (N.D. Cal.
2014) (challenging Ibrahim's inclusion on the No Fly List under the First
Amendment (freedom of association and freedom of religion), Fourth Amendment
(freedom from unreasonable search and seizure), Fifth Amendment (procedural due
process and substantive due process), and Fourteenth Amendment (equal
protection)).





n399.  See First Amended Complaint paras. 52-72, Ibrahim, 62 F. Supp. 3d 909
(N.D. Cal. 2014) (No. C06-0545 WHA), 2006 WL 2330786; Complaint for Injunctive
and Declaratory Relief paras. 216-255, Latif v. Holder, 28 F. Supp. 3d 1134 (D.
Or. 2014) (No. 10-CV-750-BR).





n400.  NASA v. Nelson, 562 U.S. 134, 140-42 (2011).





n401.  See supra notes 298-99 and accompanying text.





n402.  Nelson, 562 U.S. at 143 n.5.





n403.  See Defendants' Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment, Latif, 28 F. Supp. 3d
1134 (D. Or. 2014) (No. 3:10-cv-00750-BR), 2015 WL 11347548.


                               22 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                                      IPR

                      May 13, 2017 Saturday 12:10 PM  EST

NCRB ORGANISED NATIONAL WORKSHOP ON "CRIME DATA ANALYTICS"

LENGTH: 825  words


India, May 13 -- The Government of India issued the following news release:

A National Workshop on "Crime Data Analytics" was organised by National Crime
Records Bureau (NCRB) in association with Indian Police Foundation here
yesterday.

Delegates from State Police (Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Delhi, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Mumbai & Pune
Commissionerates), CAPFs (ITBP, BSF, Assam Rifles, SSB), Industry, ISRO (ADRIN),
NTRO, IIT Mumbai, BITS Pilani participated in the meeting.

Shri KC Verma, Retd. Secretary(R), Shri Rajendra Khanna, Shri Ram Avtar Yadav
Retd. DG (NCRB), Shri Suhir Kumar, Retd. CVC, Shri Jayonto Choudhary, Retd DG,
NSG, Shri Sunil Kumar, Retd. Chief Secretary (Chhattisgarh), Shri Sanjay Sinha,
DG (Tripura) Retd., Shri Raghuraman, Ex-CEO, NATGrid also participated in the
workshop.

In the conference the topics on Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, Dashboarding and its possible deployment in Police domain were
thoroughly discussed.

Dr. Ish Kumar, Director, NCRB described origin, activities and future roadmaps
of NCRB. He suggested that the ample Data generated in CCTNS can now be used for
Crime Analytics and NCRB will lead efforts in this regard to establish Data
Analysis ecosystem in the State Police Forces. NCRB had played a significant
role in computerization of State Police Forces by providing hardware and
software in CCIS, CIPA and CCTNS project. He also informed that CCTNS is an
important pillar in Interoperable Criminal Justice System Project (ICJS). He
added that Crime Analytical Software like PredPol has reduced crime by 25% in
Los Angeles.

Shri N. Ramachandran, President, Indian Police Foundation (IPF) emphasised on
the evidence based data driven practices with crime data analytics tools for
predictive policing. He also suggested that NCRB should take a leadership
position in establishing itself as pioneer in the field for Police.

Shri Raghu Raman, former CEO of NATGRID shared his experience about the power of
Data Analytics to combat crime in strategic level and better policing with some
live examples from other domains. Other delegates highlighted problems in
collecting quality data, integrity of data, limitation of dynamic search, crime
mapping with over-policing, crime displacement etc.

Special Commissioner of Delhi Police spoke about application of IT in Crime Data
Capturing and Analysis by Delhi Police. He emphasised on integration of all data
from CCTVs and Apps, Social Media Analysis and Control Room. He also spoke about
the analysis of non-crime related calls terminating at Police Control. Scientist
from ADRIN, strategic unit of ISRO, presented "Crime Mapping Analysis and
Predictive Systems" (CMAPS) developed for Delhi Police.

Delegates shared the problems like poor data quality, non-availability of tools
and manpower which needs to be overcome to adopt the Data Analytics Framework.
The data emerging out of Control rooms and Non-cognisable Crime should also be
analyzed. The work done by field level officers in field of IT should be given
Platform by NCRB to showcase their products and ideas for national absorption.

Representatives from IIT Bombay and BITS Pilani, who were representing the
academia, presented the new inventions done in the area of Data Analytics. The
innovation of video compression was suggested to be taken forward with Police
and CAPFs for enhancing their surveillance capabilities.

Shri Srinivas, Addl. CP from Telangana Police informed that their Police has
established 30,000 CCTV Cameras with Community support. He also explained the
facilities provided to Police Officers and Citizens in their famous HydCop App.
Passport verification timeframe has been reduced considerably in Telangana with
adoption of IT. They have also envisaged public satisfaction services since last
two years and analysis is being done by the third party.

Maharashtra police has also been given a budget of Rs 850 Crores for
establishing secure cyber emergency response system with all state-of-the-art
tools and softwares. Maharashtra has established a Taskforce to identify and
develop IT solutions for Crime-related works.

The NCRB was asked to harp on the success of CCTNS project and develop
prototypes which can be adopted by the States and UTs. CAPFs desired to onboard
the CCTNS project and utilize its database for their operations. Delegates
suggested that NCRB should emerge as National Crime Centre and establish a
National Crime Portal.

ESRI, SPSS, Hexagon, Pythian, Tech-friend, Team Computer, Integra, Avlon
participated in the event and showcased the work they have done in Crime
Analytics along with their ideas and products to the delegates.

Shri Ish Kumar, Director, NCRB proposed the vote of thanks and expressed his
satisfaction on the outcome of the workshop. For any query with respect to this
article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at
htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 HT Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               23 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                                      IPR

                       May 13, 2017 Saturday 9:52 PM  EST

NCRB organised a National Workshop on "Crime Data Analytics"

LENGTH: 828  words


INDIA, May 13 -- Press Information Bureau issued the following press release:

A National Workshop on "Crime Data Analytics" was organised by National Crime
Records Bureau (NCRB) in association with Indian Police Foundation here
yesterday.

Delegates from State Police (Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Delhi, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Mumbai & Pune
Commissionerates), CAPFs (ITBP, BSF, Assam Rifles, SSB), Industry, ISRO (ADRIN),
NTRO, IIT Mumbai, BITS Pilani participated in the meeting.

Shri KC Verma, Retd. Secretary(R), Shri Rajendra Khanna, Shri Ram Avtar Yadav
Retd. DG (NCRB), Shri Suhir Kumar, Retd. CVC, Shri Jayonto Choudhary, Retd DG,
NSG, Shri Sunil Kumar, Retd. Chief Secretary (Chhattisgarh), Shri Sanjay Sinha,
DG (Tripura) Retd., Shri Raghuraman, Ex-CEO, NATGrid also participated in the
workshop.

In the conference the topics on Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, Dashboarding and its possible deployment in Police domain were
thoroughly discussed.

Dr. Ish Kumar, Director, NCRB described origin, activities and future roadmaps
of NCRB. He suggested that the ample Data generated in CCTNS can now be used for
Crime Analytics and NCRB will lead efforts in this regard to establish Data
Analysis ecosystem in the State Police Forces. NCRB had played a significant
role in computerization of State Police Forces by providing hardware and
software in CCIS, CIPA and CCTNS project. He also informed that CCTNS is an
important pillar in Interoperable Criminal Justice System Project (ICJS). He
added that Crime Analytical Software like PredPol has reduced crime by 25% in
Los Angeles.

Shri N. Ramachandran, President, Indian Police Foundation (IPF) emphasised on
the evidence based data driven practices with crime data analytics tools for
predictive policing. He also suggested that NCRB should take a leadership
position in establishing itself as pioneer in the field for Police.

Shri Raghu Raman, former CEO of NATGRID shared his experience about the power of
Data Analytics to combat crime in strategic level and better policing with some
live examples from other domains. Other delegates highlighted problems in
collecting quality data, integrity of data, limitation of dynamic search, crime
mapping with over-policing, crime displacement etc.

Special Commissioner of Delhi Police spoke about application of IT in Crime Data
Capturing and Analysis by Delhi Police. He emphasised on integration of all data
from CCTVs and Apps, Social Media Analysis and Control Room. He also spoke about
the analysis of non-crime related calls terminating at Police Control. Scientist
from ADRIN, strategic unit of ISRO, presented "Crime Mapping Analysis and
Predictive Systems" (CMAPS) developed for Delhi Police.

Delegates shared the problems like poor data quality, non-availability of tools
and manpower which needs to be overcome to adopt the Data Analytics Framework.
The data emerging out of Control rooms and Non-cognisable Crime should also be
analyzed. The work done by field level officers in field of IT should be given
Platform by NCRB to showcase their products and ideas for national absorption.

Representatives from IIT Bombay and BITS Pilani, who were representing the
academia, presented the new inventions done in the area of Data Analytics. The
innovation of video compression was suggested to be taken forward with Police
and CAPFs for enhancing their surveillance capabilities.

Shri Srinivas, Addl. CP from Telangana Police informed that their Police has
established 30,000 CCTV Cameras with Community support. He also explained the
facilities provided to Police Officers and Citizens in their famous HydCop App.
Passport verification timeframe has been reduced considerably in Telangana with
adoption of IT. They have also envisaged public satisfaction services since last
two years and analysis is being done by the third party.

Maharashtra police has also been given a budget of Rs 850 Crores for
establishing secure cyber emergency response system with all state-of-the-art
tools and softwares. Maharashtra has established a Taskforce to identify and
develop IT solutions for Crime-related works.

The NCRB was asked to harp on the success of CCTNS project and develop
prototypes which can be adopted by the States and UTs. CAPFs desired to onboard
the CCTNS project and utilize its database for their operations. Delegates
suggested that NCRB should emerge as National Crime Centre and establish a
National Crime Portal.

ESRI, SPSS, Hexagon, Pythian, Tech-friend, Team Computer, Integra, Avlon
participated in the event and showcased the work they have done in Crime
Analytics along with their ideas and products to the delegates.

Shri Ish Kumar, Director, NCRB proposed the vote of thanks and expressed his
satisfaction on the outcome of the workshop.

****

KSD/NK/PK/KM For any query with respect to this article or any other content
requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                          Copyright 2017 HT Media Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               24 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                                Daily Times (PK)

                           October 28, 2017 Saturday

A Sikh champion of Muslims

LENGTH: 1035  words

DATELINE: Pakistan


Pakistan, Oct. 28 -- To the well-known American maxim 'driving while black,' a
more recent one has been added after 9/11, 'flying while Muslim,' as Muslim
passengers on planes are now frequently targeted for speaking Arabic, wearing
the hijab or merely looking 'Middle Eastern.'

Professor Anila Daulatzai, a Pakistani-American, became a victim when on
September 26, she boarded a flight in Baltimore, expecting to land in Los
Angeles a few hours later to take care of her elderly father. After informing
flight attendants of her non-life-threatening allergy to dogs, she seated
herself in the back of the aircraft away from two dogs on the plane and prepared
to grade her students' papers. She was suddenly requested by the flight crew to
provide medical documentation of her allergy, which she had already mentioned
was not serious, and upon not being able to produce it, was told to exit the
aircraft. When she refused, the police came and violently dragged her off the
plane, as seen in a video of the incident that went viral. Following the
incident, multiple charges were issued against her, including disorderly conduct
and failure to obey a reasonable and lawful order.

Daulatzai's lawyer, Arjun Sethi, classified the arrest as the confluence of
sexism, racial profiling, and discrimination.

Formerly national legislative counsel for human rights and national security
related affairs for the American Civil Liberties Union and presently Co-Chair of
the American Bar Association's National Committee on Homeland Security,
Counterterrorism, and Treatment of Enemy Combatants, Arjun has spent most of his
career focused on countering racial and religious profiling, advancing
counterterrorism reform, and combating hate-motivated violence.

I first met Arjun, who has a Sikh background, a few years back following a talk
I gave at the National Press Club launching my book, The Thistle and the Drone.
After the programme, he came up to me and began discussing his civil and human
rights work on behalf of not only Muslim Americans, but minorities throughout
the US. I was impressed: He was fighting for justice within the system.

When I invited Arjun to speak before my World of Islam class at American
University recently he made some core points related to the rise in hate-related
incidents against Muslims since 9/11, noting they are trending at least five
times higher than prior to the attacks. He said we are living in an 'open
season' of prejudice against Muslims. Perpetual war in Iraq and Afghanistan has
contributed to prevailing negative attitudes, he argued, and the Guantanamo Bay
detention facility in Cuba stands as a testament to negative treatment of
Muslims suspected of terrorist activities.

Arjun also spoke of police tactics that often serve to perpetuate
discrimination. He shared how a team of Associated Press reporters revealed that
covert domestic surveillance programs established in New York City following
9/11, for example, were explicitly designed to monitor Muslim citizens,
representing an abandonment of rights to privacy that all Americans are entitled
to enjoy. None of the surveillance was based on reasonable suspicion or probable
cause, but instead solely based on identity. The surveillance did not result in
a single conviction.

These surveillance programs, he noted, have been complemented by watch lists.
There are three types of watch lists administered by the Transportation Security
Administration: a Terrorist Watch List of 2 million individuals suspected of
terrorist activities; a Selectee List, which requires listed individuals to
undergo enhanced screening measures before flying; and a No-Fly List of some
100,000, which forbids listed individuals from boarding an airplane. The
consequences of these watch lists are serious. Those listed may be unable to see
their families or even apply for loans and employment. Listed individuals are
generally considered too dangerous to fly, but not dangerous enough to be
arrested, which keeps them in an uneasy limbo with broad consequences.

Arjun also discussed the efficacy of Countering Violent Extremism (CVE)
programs, which are designed to target individuals who may become terrorists.
These programs are a form of predictive policing, he explained, as they use an
individual's prior history to determine 'threat scores' and geographic analysis
of criminal activity to assess potential 'hot spots.' Arjun believes these
programs are based on abstract methods and junk science that ultimately serve as
another mechanism for surveillance of Muslim citizens.

Arjun argued that the US government needs to begin addressing the structural
racism, discrimination, and criminalisation that foster hate and violence
against Muslims, who remain disproportionately targeted by American national
security policy.

Arjun also pointed to media representations that encourage Islamophobia. He
cited a Media Matters study conducted on three days of media reporting after the
recent "Muslim ban." Their findings revealed that of 176 guests on Fox News,
CNN, and MSNBC, the three major broadcast news networks, only 14 guests were
actual Muslims.

Viewing the compassion he brings to his work, I could not but think of the
wisdom of the founder of his faith, Guru Nanak, who famously said, "Those that
have loved are those that have found God." While Pakistan has somewhat of a
reputation as encouraging religious intolerance, in fact, the birthplace of Guru
Nanak, which I visited not long ago, is in Nankana Sahib, Pakistan, and I can
report that it is spotlessly clean and tended with special reverence and
affection by the local administration.

Here in America, Arjun Sethi, is championing the great Guru's message of
humanity by fighting for the civil rights of Muslims and of all Americans.

The writer is an author, poet, filmmaker, playwright, and is the Ibn Khaldun
Chair of Islamic Studies, American University in Washington, DC. He formerly
served as the Pakistani High Commissioner to the UK and Ireland. He tweets
@AskAkbar

Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Daily Times. For
any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please
contact Editor at content.services@htlive.com

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                        Copyright 2017 Right Vision News
                              All Rights Reserved


                               25 of 27 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       August 8, 2017 Tuesday 7:00 AM GMT

Rise of the racist robots - how AI is learning all our worst impulses;
There is a saying in computer science: garbage in, garbage out. When we feed
machines data that reflects our prejudices, they mimic them - from antisemitic
chatbots to racially biased software. Does a horrifying future await people
forced to live at the mercy of algorithms?

BYLINE: Stephen Buranyi

SECTION: INEQUALITY; Version:1

LENGTH: 2271 words


In May last year, a stunning report claimed that a computer program used by a US
court for risk assessment was biased against black prisoners. The program,
Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions (Compas),
was much more prone to mistakenly label black defendants as likely to reoffend -
wrongly flagging them at almost twice the rate as white people (45% to 24%),
according to the investigative journalism organisation ProPublica.

Compas and programs similar to it were in use in hundreds of courts across the
US, potentially informing the decisions of judges and other officials. The
message seemed clear: the US justice system, reviled for its racial bias, had
turned to technology for help, only to find that the algorithms had a racial
bias too.

How could this have happened? The private company that supplies the software,
Northpointe, disputed the conclusions of the report, but declined to reveal the
inner workings of the program, which it considers commercially sensitive. The
accusation gave frightening substance to a worry that has been brewing among
activists and computer scientists for years and which the tech giants Google and
Microsoft have recently taken steps to investigate : that as our computational
tools have become more advanced, they have become more opaque. The data they
rely on - arrest records, postcodes, social affiliations, income - can reflect,
and further ingrain, human prejudice.

The promise of machine learning and other programs that work with big data
(often under the umbrella term "artificial intelligence" or AI) was that the
more information we feed these sophisticated computer algorithms, the better
they perform. Last year, according to global management consultant McKinsey,
tech companies spent somewhere between $20bn and $30bn on AI, mostly in research
and development. Investors are making a big bet that AI will sift through the
vast amounts of information produced by our society and find patterns that will
help us be more efficient, wealthier and happier.

It has led to a decade-long AI arms race in which the UK government is offering
six-figure salaries to computer scientists. They hope to use machine learning
to, among other things, help unemployed people find jobs, predict the
performance of pension funds and sort through revenue and customs casework. It
has become a kind of received wisdom that these programs will touch every aspect
of our lives. ("It's impossible to know how widely adopted AI is now, but I do
know we can't go back," one computer scientist says.)

It's impossible to know how widely adopted AI is now, but I do know we can't go
back

But, while some of the most prominent voices in the industry are concerned with
the far-off future apocalyptic potential of AI, there is less attention paid to
the more immediate problem of how we prevent these programs from amplifying the
inequalities of our past and affecting the most vulnerable members of our
society. When the data we feed the machines reflects the history of our own
unequal society, we are, in effect, asking the program to learn our own biases.

"If you're not careful, you risk automating the exact same biases these programs
are supposed to eliminate," says Kristian Lum, the lead statistician at the San
Francisco-based, non-profit Human Rights Data Analysis Group (HRDAG). Last year,
Lum and a co-author showed that PredPol, a program for police departments that
predicts hotspots where future crime might occur, could potentially get stuck in
a feedback loop of over-policing majority black and brown neighbourhoods. The
program was "learning" from previous crime reports. For Samuel Sinyangwe, a
justice activist and policy researcher, this kind of approach is "especially
nefarious" because police can say: "We're not being biased, we're just doing
what the math tells us." And the public perception might be that the algorithms
are impartial.

We have already seen glimpses of what might be on the horizon. Programs
developed by companies at the forefront of AI research have resulted in a string
of errors that look uncannily like the darker biases of humanity: a Google image
recognition program labelled the faces of several black people as gorillas; a
LinkedIn advertising program showed a preference for male names in searches, and
a Microsoft chatbot called Tay spent a day learning from Twitter and began
spouting antisemitic messages.

These small-scale incidents were all quickly fixed by the companies involved and
have generally been written off as "gaffes". But the Compas revelation and Lum's
study hint at a much bigger problem, demonstrating how programs could replicate
the sort of large-scale systemic biases that people have spent decades
campaigning to educate or legislate away.

Computers don't become biased on their own. They need to learn that from us. For
years, the vanguard of computer science has been working on machine learning,
often having programs learn in a similar way to humans - observing the world (or
at least the world we show them) and identifying patterns. In 2012, Google
researchers fed their computer "brain" millions of images from YouTube videos to
see what it could recognise. It responded with blurry black-and-white outlines
of human and cat faces. The program was never given a definition of a human face
or a cat; it had observed and "learned" two of our favourite subjects.

This sort of approach has allowed computers to perform tasks - such as language
translation, recognising faces or recommending films in your Netflix queue -
that just a decade ago would have been considered too complex to automate. But
as the algorithms learn and adapt from their original coding, they become more
opaque and less predictable. It can soon become difficult to understand exactly
how the complex interaction of algorithms generated a problematic result. And,
even if we could, private companies are disinclined to reveal the commercially
sensitive inner workings of their algorithms (as was the case with Northpointe).

Less difficult is predicting where problems can arise. Take Google's face
recognition program: cats are uncontroversial, but what if it was to learn what
British and American people think a CEO looks like? The results would likely
resemble the near-identical portraits of older white men that line any bank or
corporate lobby. And the program wouldn't be inaccurate: only 7% of FTSE CEOs
are women. Even fewer, just 3%, have a BME background. When computers learn from
us, they can learn our less appealing attributes.

Joanna Bryson, a researcher at the University of Bath, studied a program
designed to "learn" relationships between words. It trained on millions of pages
of text from the internet and began clustering female names and pronouns with
jobs such as "receptionist" and "nurse". Bryson says she was astonished by how
closely the results mirrored the real-world gender breakdown of those jobs in US
government data, a nearly 90% correlation.

"People expected AI to be unbiased; that's just wrong. If the underlying data
reflects stereotypes, or if you train AI from human culture, you will find these
things," Bryson says.

People expected AI to be unbiased; that's just wrong

So who stands to lose out the most? Cathy O'Neil, the author of the book Weapons
of Math Destruction about the dangerous consequences of outsourcing decisions to
computers, says it's generally the most vulnerable in society who are exposed to
evaluation by automated systems. A rich person is unlikely to have their job
application screened by a computer, or their loan request evaluated by anyone
other than a bank executive. In the justice system, the thousands of defendants
with no money for a lawyer or other counsel would be the most likely candidates
for automated evaluation.

In London, Hackney council has recently been working with a private company to
apply AI to data, including government health and debt records, to help predict
which families have children at risk of ending up in statutory care. Other
councils have reportedly looked into similar programs.

In her 2016 paper, HRDAG's Kristian Lum demonstrated who would be affected if a
program designed to increase the efficiency of policing was let loose on biased
data. Lum and her co-author took PredPol - the program that suggests the likely
location of future crimes based on recent crime and arrest statistics - and fed
it historical drug-crime data from the city of Oakland's police department.
PredPol showed a daily map of likely "crime hotspots" that police could deploy
to, based on information about where police had previously made arrests. The
program was suggesting majority black neighbourhoods at about twice the rate of
white ones, despite the fact that when the statisticians modelled the city's
likely overall drug use, based on national statistics, it was much more evenly
distributed.

As if that wasn't bad enough, the researchers also simulated what would happen
if police had acted directly on PredPol's hotspots every day and increased their
arrests accordingly: the program entered a feedback loop, predicting more and
more crime in the neighbourhoods that police visited most. That caused still
more police to be sent in. It was a virtual mirror of the real-world criticisms
of initiatives such as New York City's controversial "stop-and-frisk" policy. By
over-targeting residents with a particular characteristic, police arrested them
at an inflated rate, which then justified further policing.

PredPol's co-developer, Prof Jeff Brantingham, acknowledged the concerns when
asked by the Washington Post. He claimed that - to combat bias -  drug arrests
and other offences that rely on the discretion of officers were not used with
the software because they are often more heavily enforced in poor and minority
communities.

And while most of us don't understand the complex code within programs such as
PredPol, Hamid Khan, an organiser with Stop LAPD Spying Coalition, a community
group addressing police surveillance in Los Angeles, says that people do
recognise predictive policing as "another top-down approach where policing
remains the same: pathologising whole communities".

There is a saying in computer science, something close to an informal law:
garbage in, garbage out. It means that programs are not magic. If you give them
flawed information, they won't fix the flaws, they just process the information.
Khan has his own truism: "It's racism in, racism out."

It's unclear how existing laws to protect against discrimination and to regulate
algorithmic decision-making apply in this new landscape. Often the technology
moves faster than governments can address its effects. In 2016, the Cornell
University professor and former Microsoft researcher Solon Barocas claimed that
current laws "largely fail to address discrimination" when it comes to big data
and machine learning. Barocas says that many traditional players in civil
rights, including the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), are taking the
issue on in areas such as housing or hiring practices. Sinyangwe recently worked
with the ACLU to try to pass city-level policies requiring police to disclose
any technology they adopt, including AI.

But the process is complicated by the fact that public institutions adopt
technology sold by private companies, whose inner workings may not be
transparent. "We don't want to deputise these companies to regulate themselves,"
says Barocas.

In the UK, there are some existing protections. Government services and
companies must disclose if a decision has been entirely outsourced to a
computer, and, if so, that decision can be challenged. But Sandra Wachter, a law
scholar at the Alan Turing Institute at Oxford University, says that the
existing laws don't map perfectly to the way technology has advanced. There are
a variety of loopholes that could allow the undisclosed use of algorithms. She
has called for a "right to explanation", which would require a full disclosure
as well as a higher degree of transparency for any use of these programs.

The scientific literature on the topic now reflects a debate on the nature of
"fairness" itself, and researchers are working on everything from ways to strip
"unfair" classifiers from decades of historical data, to modifying algorithms to
skirt round any groups protected by existing anti-discrimination laws. One
researcher at the Turing Institute told me the problem was so difficult because
"changing the variables can introduce new bias, and sometimes we're not even
sure how bias affects the data, or even where it is".

The institute has developed a program that tests a series of counterfactual
propositions to track what affects algorithmic decisions: would the result be
the same if the person was white, or older, or lived elsewhere? But there are
some who consider it an impossible task to integrate the various definitions of
fairness adopted by society and computer scientists, and still retain a
functional program.

"In many ways, we're seeing a response to the naive optimism of the earlier
days," Barocas says. "Just two or three years ago you had articles credulously
claiming: 'Isn't this great? These things are going to eliminate bias from
hiring decisions and everything else.'"

Meanwhile, computer scientists face an unfamiliar challenge: their work
necessarily looks to the future, but in embracing machines that learn, they find
themselves tied to our age-old problems of the past.

Follow the Guardian's Inequality Project on Twitter here, or
email us at inequality.project@theguardian.com

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2017 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved


                               26 of 27 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright (c) 2017 Fordham Urban Law Journal
                           Fordham Urban Law Journal

                                   May, 2017

                           Fordham Urban Law Journal

                            44 Fordham Urb. L.J. 277

LENGTH: 10043 words

PROPERTY AND THE CHALLENGE OF HOUSING AFFORDABILITY: ARTICLE: AFFORDABLE HOUSING
LAW AND POLICY IN AN ERA OF BIG DATA

NAME: Nestor M. Davidson *

BIO:


* Professor and Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, Fordham University School
of Law. This Article was prepared for the 2017 AALS Annual Conference and
received helpful feedback from participants in workshops at the 2016 Property
Works in Progress Conference and the Tulane Property Roundtable. I wish to thank
Eva Schneider for her excellent research assistance, Clare Huntington for her
key insights, and Raphael Bostic, well, just because.

 TEXT:
 [*277]  INTRODUCTION

   Every year, federal, state, and local governments invest more than $ 50
billion to provide housing for people who cannot otherwise afford shelter.  n1
[*278]  In addition to this housing assistance, policymakers also make a variety
of choices that impact the landscape of affordable housing, including in zoning,
infrastructure, housing finance more broadly, and in a myriad of other policy
domains.  n2 These policies can make a profound difference for the millions of
individuals and families helped, but are too often undertaken with only the
vaguest, visceral sense of their consequences beyond the bare facts of putting
roofs over people's heads.

   However, affordable housing policy is beginning to experience a shift in
perspective. To the extent that policymakers have collected data on impact, the
focus traditionally has been primarily on outputs. These measures included the
number of units built through a given investment, the number of people served
under a given program, the number of construction or property management jobs
created, and the like. But outputs are not always--indeed, not often--the same
as outcomes, the actual short- and long-term consequences of policy
interventions for those served by affordable housing programs and the
communities at issue.  n3

   In recent years, researchers and policymakers have begun to evaluate the
results of policy interventions for people in subsidized housing on measures
such as income, educational achievement, physical and mental health, and even
subjective wellbeing.  n4 Rather than merely track whether people have housing
at a given level of affordability, this new focus understands that housing is a
platform for a variety of life outcomes and that housing policy choices can
meaningfully impact the arc of those outcomes.

   This emphasis on outcome measures reflects a broader embrace of the use of
data for decision making by managers and policymakers across the private and
public sectors.  n5 The ability to collect data in a more rigorous  [*279]  and
systematic way and the development of tools to make that information
actionable--particularly to make transparent patterns that would otherwise be
opaque--is beginning to change a range of decisional processes. This shift can
been seen in everything from how professional baseball teams select players to
how Facebook, Google, and other companies target their advertising to how
investors seek value.  n6 And data increasingly means "big data," an admittedly
fuzzy (and arguably hackneyed) concept that roughly refers to the use of
relatively large data sets, often aggregated across previously disconnected
areas, mined for the predictive value of underlying patterns and trends.  n7

   Although much has been written about data-driven policymaking, the specific
role of the legal system in improving program design and implementation deserves
deeper exploration.  n8 Across a range of affordable housing examples, explored
below,  n9 new data tools are starting to sharpen policy, but also creating a
positive feedback loop in which agencies provide data to grantees to shape how
they implement policy, gather more information about outcomes, and then share
all of that information with other regulators or advocates to help advance other
legal mandates, notably around enforcement and private rights of action. The
confluence then between emerging analytic tools and a deepening understanding of
the connection between inputs and outcomes makes affordable housing a
particularly fruitful policy arena in which to explore law's potential to
generate as well as facilitate the deployment of data to improve policy.  n10

   New data analytic tools are by no means a panacea. Incorporating big data
into affordable housing law and policy raises serious concerns that are well
rehearsed in the literature but worth reiterating in this context. On a
structural level, data quality and integrity poses a basic challenge, as does
the perennial risk that policies driven by what can be measured, such as
bricks-and-mortar metrics, will inherently misdirect resources away from  [*280]
goals that are less quantifiable, such as policies that reflect the felt
experience of people living in communities of concentrated poverty. Legal
scholars have also raised important concerns about privacy and data security.
And perhaps most importantly, there is a genuine risk that the very people whose
lives should be at the center of affordable housing policy will be even more
marginalized than they currently are when measurability is privileged over
meaning.

   There are potential answers to each of these concerns. Data must be taken in
context and with appropriate skepticism; data should be anonymized and
aggregated to the extent possible; and policymakers must find ways to be
sensitive to the dignitary harms that attend quantification. But an alternative
that fails to measure impact is hardly palatable and the potential benefits of
enhancing the ability of policymakers to understand the consequences of their
actions can actually advance the dignitary interests of those served by
affordable housing policy.

   This all may seem somewhat technical and dry--rarely has the heart fluttered
for the ephemeral value of, well, analytics. Those motivated to engage in
affordable housing--or other areas of poverty law and policy--by compassion may
recoil at discussions of number crunching. That is entirely understandable, but
data and compassion need not stand in opposition. For policy to be effective, we
need both.

   The Article is organized as follows. Part I describes big data's potential
for policy making and the emerging shift in affordable housing policy from
outputs to understanding broader measures of outcomes. Part II then looks at
several areas where data analytics are either currently changing approaches to
affordable housing policy or where there is particularly strong potential for
such a shift--by no means an exhaustive list, but illustrative. From these
examples, the Part then synthesizes what this reveals about the role of law in
generating data and deploying data. Finally, Part III highlights reasons for
caution and some responses.

   Before turning to the substance of this Article, I want to break the
authorial fourth wall for a moment, to address a question about our current
context. This Article grew in part out of my experience working in the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") General Counsel's office
early in the first Obama Administration.  n11 There, I worked with the team that
developed the agency's affirmatively furthering fair housing ("AFFH") rules. I
was also exposed to the agency's work, discussed below, to embrace data-driven
decision-making more generally.  n12  [*281]  Since beginning this Article,
however, the election of Donald Trump has injected uncertainty into affordable
and fair housing policy, especially with Dr. Ben Carson's appointment as
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.  n13 To the extent that Dr. Carson
has a record with respect to HUD's mission, it consists primarily of voicing
skepticism about the ability of the government to address segregation,  n14
although Dr. Carson in his confirmation hearing seemed more open to the work of
the agency.  n15 This, together with the Trump Administration's general
skepticism about regulation, might cast some of what this Article argues in
doubt, although it is certainly too early to know. But it is not clear that data
will be less important even if HUD moves away from promoting integration,
economic opportunity, deconcentration of poverty, and other goals broader than
simply subsidizing housing. Moreover, the longer-term trend will still favor
data-driven decision making, state and local efforts will continue, and seeds
planted in recent years may flower in other domains.

I. WHY MIGHT BIG DATA MATTER TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING POLICY?

   This section provides a brief primer on big data's potential for policy
improvement. It then turns to the start of the embrace of outcome-driven
policymaking in affordable housing. Big data and outcome-driven policymaking, of
course, are not synonymous--the former has many applications and the latter does
not require novel data tools--but their intersection raises intriguing
possibilities.

A. Big Data and Policy

   To state the obvious, policymakers have long relied on data to make
decisions. Indeed, categorization, record-keeping, sorting, and similar
bureaucratic informational management tools have so long been inherent to the
administrative state that we rarely pause to note the ubiquity of the
phenomenon.  n16 In this sense, modern policy has always been data-driven,  n17
[*282]  and a broad array of policymakers have embraced the idea of
evidence-based interventions.  n18

   What is changing today is the availability of significantly more data and
more powerful computing capabilities.  n19 Big data is one of those clichéd
terms that is hard to pin down precisely, and it is not necessary to do so here.
Generally, though, the term encompasses a set of related phenomena.  n20 First,
big data refers to the capacity to collect and aggregate massive datasets and
similar information--this is what is "big" about the phenomenon, as opposed to,
well, just data.  n21 Before I started research for this Article, I had no idea
what an exabyte was (turns out to be one billion gigabytes and a gigabyte is
about the amount of data it takes to digitally store a feature-length movie  n22
), but the world is apparently currently generating two and a half times that
much data every day.  n23

   Second, big data also often involves the aggregation of information across
heterogeneous sources. Billions of Twitter posts can reveal certain information,
but Twitter posts correlated to other social media inputs adds new insights.
Social media posts correlated to seemingly disconnected data  [*283]  about,
say, where people live and their spending habits may reveal even deeper
patterns.

   Third, big data generally refers to a set of analytic tools that can mine and
activate that data. These new capabilities are facilitated not only by the
digital footprints people increasingly leave as they navigate the online world,
but also by the spread of new sensing technologies.  n24 These analytics can be
used for actionable prediction--not just to understand past trends, but to offer
insights into how to act moving forward. The most important caveats to this
somewhat idealized version of the promise of big data are discussed below,  n25
but for policymakers, it is this last function--impact evaluation and
prediction--that has the greatest relevance.

   Examples of the use of big data are becoming increasingly common. For
example, Google famously began real-time tracking of flu outbreaks in 2009 by
linking common search terms with flu data from the Centers for Disease Control.
n26 Google also transformed spell-checking from an educated guess by engineers
at the most common errors and their corrections to a much more accurate approach
that harnessed a massive database of actual errors and the way people corrected
them.  n27 Similar examples of information aggregation and new analytic
capabilities abound in the private sector, and are becoming increasingly central
to managerial planning and decision-making.  n28

    [*284]  Policymakers are also recognizing the value of these emerging tools.
Perhaps most controversially, defense and national security agencies such as the
CIA, NSA, and Department of Defense have embraced big data, raising significant
civil liberties and privacy concerns.  n29 More prosaically, big data is
becoming increasingly important in fields such as public safety,  n30 traffic
management,  n31 public health,  n32 fraud prevention,  n33 and many other
areas.  n34 To see the potential for affordable housing, we need to delve into
another emerging trend, the shift from outputs to outcomes in that policy arena.

B. From Outputs to Outcomes in Affordable Housing

   Traditionally, affordable housing policymakers have focused on outputs but
are beginning to focus on outcomes. This shift has the potential to open much
broader horizons to improve how affordable housing is developed and delivered.

   To the extent that policymakers have tracked the results of inputs such as
subsidies or less direct interventions in housing, they have long focused on
[*285]  the immediate results of a given program or policy. For instance, HUD
has long monitored and reported on basic measures relating to housing, such as
the number of units built or supported, construction and management jobs
created, as well some indicia of the quality of the resulting housing, such as
levels of overcrowding.  n35

   Even as HUD has moved in recent years to broaden its planning and evaluation
horizon, the Department still focuses to a large extent on metrics that
concretely measure immediate outputs. For example, in its five-year Strategic
Plan for the period from 2014 to 2018, the Department listed a comprehensive
series of goals related to housing. Notable examples included:

   . The number of households experiencing "Worst Case Housing Needs," which HUD
defines as having an income below fifty percent of Area Median Income (AMI), not
receiving public assistance, and paying more than half of income on rent, living
in severely inadequate conditions, or both;  n36

   . The proportion of very low-income renters facing severe rent burdens;  n37

   . The percentage of rental units built in the preceding four years that are
affordable to very low-income renters;  n38 and

   . The production of rental units.  n39

   These are very important core metrics and the fact that the Department has
set clear, quantifiable goals around its central mission is commendable.
Nevertheless, these output measures say relatively little about the lives of the
people in the housing, or the larger community impacts of the housing
investments and other policy interventions.

   Other performance indicators in the HUD Strategic Plan do attempt to measure
the difference federal investments are making for recipients beyond these
immediate output indicators. For example, under the heading of "Economic
Prosperity," HUD now tracks the "[p]ercentage of participants enrolled in the
FSS [Family Self Sufficiency] program who have increased wages."  n40 That
begins to get at the connection between housing and consequences for residents,
linking a housing-facilitated policy intervention to employment outcomes. Yet in
other places the Department  [*286]  decries the lack of performance measures
around topics such as health outcomes.  n41

   As noted at the outset, however, researchers and policymakers are starting to
link housing to longer-term life outcomes more thoroughly. For example, Raj
Chetty, Nathanial Hendren, and Lawrence Katz recently published the results of a
study of HUD's "Moving to Opportunity" experimental voucher program. Under the
experiment, HUD offered randomly selected families subsidies to move from high-
to low-poverty neighborhoods, allowing researchers to compare relatively similar
families who did not have the same opportunity. The researchers found that
children who moved before age thirteen had a thirty-one percent higher average
income, were sixteen percent more likely to attend college, lived in
lower-poverty neighborhoods, and were less likely to be single parents as adults
than peers who did not have the same exposure to low-poverty neighborhoods.  n42

   Work in this vein has also tracked improvements from interventions that moved
people to lower-poverty neighborhoods not only in terms of the immediate
benefits of such neighborhoods, such as family safety, but also in terms of
individuals' longer-term mental health, physical health, and subjective
well-being.  n43 This is not to over-read the data; much of the emerging
neighborhood-effects literature remains contested.  n44 But beginning to
understand the consequences of the locational context of  [*287]  affordable
housing can help sharpen decisions about siting, mobility, transit connections,
and more.

   A shift from outputs to outcomes raises a number of questions, among which is
an essentially functional one: how can policymakers realistically operationalize
this change?  n45 Among other things, doing so requires gathering and
understanding significant amounts of information, which is most likely why
agencies have often focused on much simpler metrics, such as the number of units
built in a year. Given the rise of big data, however, there is potential to
operationalize new approaches both to targeting resources and to linking
related, but often functionally isolated, policy areas.

II. BIG DATA IN AFFORDABLE HOUSING LAW AND POLICY

   With that background, we can turn to the details of where the shift toward
data-driven decision making is beginning to emerge in affordable housing as well
as examples of areas where more sophisticated aggregation and analytical
capacities seem to have particular promise. This section focuses on siting
decisions and locational choice, resident relations and services, and portfolio
management and property oversight, especially across the subsidized and
unsubsidized stock of affordable housing. These examples are, of necessity,
addressed below at a fairly high level of generality, but should give a sense of
some primary areas of affordable housing policy and practice where new data
tools have particular potential. The Part thus concludes with some reflections
on what these examples  [*288]  suggest for the role of big data in improving
affordable housing policy and law in improving the availability of that data.

A. Some Examples of Big Data's Potential in Affordable Housing

1. Siting Decisions, Mobility, and Neighborhood Effects

   The first step beyond simple outcomes metrics in affordable housing involves
the impact of neighborhood and regional context, which means that locational
choice is particularly amenable to emerging analytics. HUD's new policy
framework around AFFH provides a modest but promising attempt to use data to
address--among other goals--the locational consequences of housing siting
decisions.

   The policy grows out of the federal Fair Housing Act's mandate that
recipients of federal housing funding affirmatively further the purposes of the
Act.  n46 In a recently adopted rule,  n47 HUD has created a national planning
framework under which the Department will supply data to state and local
governments and public housing agencies ("PHAs") across the country--almost all
local governments get HUD funding and there are thousands of PHAs--with a range
of uniform data on integration and segregation, housing needs, and indicia of
economic opportunity.  n48 The rule then requires that these program
participants engage in their own analysis of fair housing based on that data and
their own additional insights, to identify:

   . "integration and segregation patterns and trends based on race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, national origin, and disability within the
jurisdiction and region;"

    [*289]  . "racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty within the
jurisdiction and region;"

   . "significant disparities in access to opportunity for any protected class
within the jurisdiction and region;" and

   . "disproportionate housing needs for any protected class within the
jurisdiction and region."  n49

   This data-driven exercise is a significant advance and has the potential to
shed light on a wide range of decisions that local governments and PHAs make
that are currently without a great deal of context. For example, understanding
longitudinal patterns of the demographics of housing need can help inform siting
decisions and shape affirmative marketing plans. It can also help policymakers
understand questions such as concentration and agglomeration effects.  n50 Each
jurisdiction will use the data differently, but the underlying theory is that
grantees will not only address obvious barriers to fair housing choice but will
also deploy the planning tool data to guide housing siting, will also target
enforcement resources and make other policy decisions in light of the patterns
that the data reveals.

   One challenge in this emerging framework is that the data tools that the
agency and its grantees rely on are relatively broad-scale, in that they by
necessity must be available for every jurisdiction in the country. Metrics such
as neighborhood demographics, racial and ethnic concentration of poverty, school
quality, job proximity, transit costs, and environmental health reveal a great
deal about broad patterns and context for housing policy choices but require a
significant amount of interpretation to shape decision making.  n51

    [*290]  Here, big data can produce a richer understanding of the link
between inputs and outcomes in terms of the consequences of locational choice.
New tools can do so by introducing much greater detail in terms of specific
communities, but also by helping to tackle one of the greatest challenges in
understanding impact: the longitudinal effects of policy interventions. The AFFH
framework can give an accurate point-in-time picture of where the categories
protected by the Fair Housing Act intersect with opportunity and housing
investments, but it will take additional data and more sophisticated analytical
tools to ferret out how that context changes in light of specific policy
choices.

   Ultimately, these tools could not only target community-level outcomes but
potentially even city-wide and metro-level shifts, if aggregated across
localities. They could also help policymakers focus on broader outcomes such as
neighborhood change, tracking, for example, the pace of gentrification and
displacement from various public investments. This will not make the decision to
put a given housing development in site A versus site B necessarily easier
(given the significant market and political constraints on all affordable
housing), nor will it resolve the debate about place versus mobility.  n52
Nevertheless, it can at least make the consequences of individual subsidy
decisions and the larger structure of subsidies more transparent.

2. Housing Portfolio Management

   A second general arena of affordable housing policy in which new data tools
have particular promise involves market conditions as well as the oversight and
management of housing assets. In these examples, the emphasis is less on data
sharpening our understanding of where to deploy resources in terms of outcomes,
and more on using technology to aggregate information to improve affordable
housing practice and pragmatic policy implementation.

a. Subsidy Targeting and Market Conditions

   Big data tools can be useful in understanding how rent subsidy levels align
with market conditions. As Matthew Desmond recently argued, better targeting of
subsidies could free up substantial housing resources.  n53  [*291]  The
challenge, as Desmond points out, is that the broader the area for which
rent-subsidy levels are set, the more over-and under-inclusive they are likely
to be, compensating landlords in some neighborhoods above market while
simultaneously preventing mobility to higher-income areas. HUD has begun to
shift from metropolitan-level Housing Choice Voucher "fair market rents" to much
more targeted zip code level measures in those metropolitan areas that are
facing problems with voucher holders being concentrated in high-poverty
neighborhoods.  n54 But this is a pilot program and it only targets a subset of
markets in a single program. By aggregating information about much more narrowly
targeted market rents, as well a host of related transactional data,
policymakers could get a much more fine-grained window into market conditions
and thus appropriate subsidy levels across a range of programs.  n55

b. Enforcement and Housing Quality

   New capacities to aggregate and analyze large data streams likewise hold
promise to help policymakers more efficiently and effectively ensure the quality
of housing and target interventions to remedy housing quality issues. Currently,
local governments collect a great deal of property-level data from code
enforcement, nuisance complaints, fire and police dispatches, and other sources,
while states and the federal government collect information about housing
quality through subsidy programs. But rarely is this information brought
together, let alone used in a way to improve oversight.  n56

    [*292]  This kind of aggregation could be particularly important in the
context of the link between housing quality and health outcomes. For example,
the evidence linking indoor lead paint and problems with childhood development
is overwhelmingly clear.  n57 No comprehensive database of lead in housing
exists, although some state and local governments do track lead-paint
inspections and violations.  n58 A big-data approach could consolidate multiple
sources of information--home inspections, transactional data, lead-law
citations, complaints--and provide a much more comprehensive picture not only of
the landscape of risk, but also of more or less effective mitigation.  n59 There
are many other examples where data can improve policy around the nexus of
housing and health outcomes, including indoor air quality, vectors of chronic
illness related to damp, cold, and mold, and even injuries.  n60

   Big data could also be used to track better and worse landlords, both to
target enforcement resources and, ultimately, to influence choices about which
housing developers or managers should receive assistance. HUD currently manages
a process, known colloquially as the "2530 process", to spot providers who pose
particular financial or operational risks.  n61 HUD recently revamped this
process,  n62 which until relatively recently involved paper submissions and
individual review, but both HUD and other housing providers often have
challenges assessing the risk of potential grantees (let alone using past
performance to influence subsidy decisions in conditions of scarcity). Bringing
information about providers, their management structures, and their past
experience not only with specific subsidy programs but with other housing
ventures, could not only streamline this  [*293]  kind of past-participation
review, but could also help policymakers understand the operational and
managerial factors that distinguish lower-risk partners from higher-risk
partners.

c. Unifying the Subsidized and Unsubsidized Housing Portfolio

   In this vein, new data tools may have particular promise in finding practical
ways to bridge the subsidized and unsubsidized portfolios of affordable housing.
For understandable reasons, affordable housing policy tends to focus on the
portion of the housing stock available to low-income residents that is publicly
subsidized. As Harvard's Joint Center for Housing Studies has noted, however,
about three quarters of the stock of affordable housing is unsubsidized.  n63

   The portion of the portfolio that is not part of any direct subsidy program
is often relatively invisible to policymakers, tends not to be supervised in any
meaningful way (except to the extent the portfolio intersects with nuisance
claims and individual code enforcement), and is not integrated into holistic
programs.  n64 With improved data collection and analytics, it would be possible
to start to unify this "shadow"  n65 inventory with the much more transparent
subsidized portfolio in a variety of ways, from gathering cost data related to
development and operations to including outcomes related to the unsubsidized
portfolio in locational analyses, to offering tools to assist with property
management and tenant relations. New aggregation tools could also be used to
better connect residents in the shadow portfolio to the kinds of services often
more readily available to residents of the subsidized portfolio.

3. Resident Relations and Services

   Moving, finally, from subsidy market conditions and portfolio management to
individual residents, there is much that a big-data approach to affordable
housing could facilitate in terms of individual residents. To begin, data
aggregation tools can be used to track demand and even help with wait lists to
foster more functional, even potentially regional, markets. In many cities, wait
lists for available subsidized housing can be months  [*294]  and, in some
high-demand jurisdictions, even years long.  n66 Given the mix of subsidies as
well as the reality that much of the housing that might serve low-income
communities is not subsidized, low-income housing markets are often fragmented
and challenging to navigate.  n67 Jurisdictions could benefit from
clearinghouses or unified waiting lists, with new data tools greatly enhancing
the ability of providers to match demand.

   An even more significant way to use new data aggregation and analytical tools
would be to build on the idea of housing as a platform to make that platform
work better across social services. Housing is a particularly appropriate locus
for a wide range of interventions, from educational support for children living
in affordable housing, to job training for adults, to a range of wrap-around
services for the formerly homeless in a "housing first" approach.  n68

   Big data could be used here both to target services and to understand the
consequences of those interventions. In terms of targeting, given that many
residents of affordable housing encounter services across a range of areas,
providers could access multiple sources of information to understand the needs
of their clients without residents having to aggregate that information
themselves. In terms of impacts, understanding the outcomes of various services
could help providers over time focus on the relative efficacy of individual
supports and the appropriate mix of support over large populations being served.

   This kind of an approach is not distinctive to affordable housing, and social
service agencies could use any other point of entry. If, however, policymakers
could match education records, employment records, family  [*295]  disruption
data, and myriad other sources, they could potentially target assistance with
much greater efficacy.

B. Synthesis and Reflections on the Role of Law

   To take a step back and synthesize the examples above, they generally point
to several functions for big data to improve affordable housing policy. First,
new data tools can improve policymakers' ability to target resources, whether in
terms of direct subsidies, enforcement activities, or the larger policy context
in which affordable housing exists. Second, and perhaps most promising in the
short run, new data tools can help policymakers, providers, and advocates
coordinate across silos. Vertically, technology can better integrate federal,
state, and local operations. Horizontally, data tools can help bridge gaps
across agencies at each level of government as well as across states and
localities at the sub-federal level, where appropriate. If big data did nothing
else but facilitate this kind of information sharing, it would still have great
potential to improve the provision of services, respond to regional housing
needs, and link housing data to other inputs such as environmental quality,
public safety, employment opportunities, and education, just as the AFFH
approach has begun to do. Finally, new data tools could add private information
to the decisional matrix and to understanding outcomes. This is perhaps most
challenging, legally, but also where law has the clearest role to play.

   To be clear, in the immediate term policymakers may find the best value in
what might be called "medium data."  n69 Rather than attempting to connect the
dots from billions of data points akin to searches on Google, policymakers in
affordable housing may be able to utilize new analytic capabilities to make
predictions about subsidies and related policy choices by aggregating relatively
accessible information about market conditions, demographics, specific
properties, and subsidies. The longer-term potential to increase this to a much
more sophisticated look at, for example, dynamics of neighborhood change and the
relative impacts of various policy levers is intriguing, but should not deter
from shorter-term more manageable deployment.

   This is not to be na[#xEF]ve about the genuine costs and other practical
barriers to implementing any data effort that would truly yield new insights at
scale.  n70 The most obvious reason why affordable housing policymakers  [*296]
have defaulted to simple output measures, to the extent that they have tracked
outcomes, is that it is just simply hard to do anything more. Perhaps if the
value of tracking--and making predictions about--impact through new data tools
were clearer, the cost-benefit might shift. But given the choice between
investing in sophisticated analytics or investing in another unit of housing,
most rational subsidy or housing providers will tend to prefer the immediate
impact of a roof over the head of someone in need.

   One answer may come by looking to HUD's approach to AFFH, which shows the
potential role for federal investment in data tools. If local governments,
public housing authorities, and non-profit housing providers do not have the
resources to invest in analytics--and most do not--then the federal government
can step in and do so at scale. Indeed, HUD has recently launched a broad-scale
initiative as part of an interagency agreement with the Census Department to
provide qualified researchers with access to certain HUD-sponsored evaluation
datasets.  n71 This agency "data democratization" effort is slated to expand to
a broad range of HUD administrative and other information sources.  n72 Ideally,
information could flow not only to researchers, but from researchers to
providers and policymakers.  n73

   If affordable housing provides numerous examples of where new data tools can
help shape policy, it is possible at this juncture to focus on how law can
improve the flow of that information. Currently, statutory and administrative
mandates play a relatively modest role in either generating or utilizing the
potential of big data. Law is essentially mostly parasitic to data efforts, if
not directly a hindrance.

   But there can be a dialectic relationship between law and data for policy
making. Legal mandates can help bring information to the surface and can create
structures to capture and facilitate the analysis of that information. That
information can then be used to sharpen policy. The new AFFH framework, for
example, reflects an agency implementing a statutory  [*297]  mandate through
planning tools that aggregate information across a variety of sources that mix
government-generated data with information collected on a mandatory basis from
grantees. Grantees then deploy this data, to analyze, plan, and act. The results
of this nexus can then be collected and fed back to grantees to identify more or
less effective policies. Thus, the legal system is facilitating the generation
of data; data are aggregated and deployed to guide policy decisions; and the
process is then iterated.

   Equally important, patterns revealed through this cycle, which might
otherwise be hard to see, can help inform how regulators and advocates advance
other legal mandates, including enforcement and private rights of action. Data
and deeper structural analysis can thus be used in tandem with substantive
liability standards to target issues like discrimination. This could be the
basis for litigation, whether individual or structural. The Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act ("HMDA"), particularly after amendments in 1989 that made much
more detailed information about the demographics of applicants and borrowers
required,  n74 is a model for this dynamic. Under HMDA, lenders are required to
provide detailed information about lending practices, which advocates and
regulators can then use to challenge patterns of discrimination.  n75 Thus, the
law requires private actors to disclose activity and that disclosure can reveal
patterns that yield liability and, most importantly, change behavior.  n76

III. BIG DATA'S DARK SIDE: CAVEATS AND (SOME) RESPONSES

   To this point, it would be fair to read this Article as something of an
unalloyed paean to big data's potential value for affordable housing, but there
are a number of reasons to be cautious in any exploration of the phenomenon's
potential. Several caveats emerge from the literature on big data worth
attending to, both from a structural perspective, and in terms of the
individuals that are the inevitable subjects--to use that term advisedly--of any
big-data project.

   To begin with structural concerns, many commentators have noted that big
data, as much as traditional data (and perhaps more so), has the potential to
suffer from basic challenges with informational quality.  n77  [*298]  Moreover,
it is not just that the quality of any analysis is inherently limited by the
quality of the sources, and maintaining data governance can be a costly
exercise. Measurability itself can be a misleading proxy for policy outcomes
that might be harder to quantify but are no less (or even more) important.  n78
These alternatives might be concrete but harder to measure (just as units
produced are easier to measure than long-term subjective well-being), but there
is also the risk that values that are not measurable--fairness, dignity--will be
lost.

   There are no definitive answers to these structural concerns and the best
response is not so much legal, but practical. Policymakers, to the extent they
are going to rely on data, especially the potentially unwieldy reams of
information in a big data approach, must focus on continuous improvement and a
feedback loop that can come from actually deploying the data in practice. Data
quality and data management challenges also auger strongly for a measure of
skepticism in not allowing the data to be overly determinative in decision
making, as hard as it is to resist the allure of the concrete.

   Shifting to the people whose lives and experiences generate the data on which
big data lives--and whose lives will be influenced by decisions made based on
that data--the rise of new analytic tools raises genuine concerns not just about
privacy, but also about the loss of control of one's identity.  n79 Closely
related to this is a concern with the risk that datafication will undermine the
dignity and individual humanity of the people being quantified. Numbers can
speak louder than individual voices and seemingly implacable data can obscure
the very real life experiences. This affects policy as a structural matter but
it also affects people because it reduces who they are to a series of numbers
and quantifiable outcomes (graduation rates, health assessments, and the like).
And this can all exacerbate existing power dynamics that risk minimizing the
agency of people served by affordable housing programs.

   These are important issues, and clearly policymakers must be sensitive to the
perspectives of those served and power dynamics, but they are  [*299]
ultimately manageable in the affordable housing context. Much of the data that
would be a part of any effort to sharpen our understanding of outcomes is
amenable to anonymization and must be treated on an aggregated basis. And
privacy--for residents as well as providers--must be central to how data is
collected, stored, and analyzed.

   But privacy and the importance of preserving individual voice should not be
an insuperable barrier to gaining practical value from new data tools. Consumers
currently make choices on a daily basis to share information with technology
companies in order to improve the collective information base available to all
users. When someone accesses Google Maps on a mobile device, they are both
receiving and sending information about location and traffic conditions and the
like  n80 and it is reasonable to trade privacy for the value of that
information exchange. A similar dynamic can pertain with affordable housing and
related areas of policy.

   More fundamentally, it is worth asking "as compared to what?" For those
appropriately concerned about individual voice and the dignity of residents, it
is not so clear that our current affordable housing system is serving the most
vulnerable right now as well as it could. Indeed, it is fair to argue that we do
not pay enough attention to residents and clients in the current structure of
housing policy.  n81 Fundamental values can be advanced by better tools, and
these are not ultimately incommensurate goals. We can focus on humanity and
dignity in practice and use data to advance that. There is at least the
potential that for all the problems with quantifiability, data can center
housing policy choices on outcomes that put residents (rather than buildings or
providers) more clearly at the center of policy focus. In many critical areas of
public policy, including providing affordable housing for the most vulnerable,
limited public resources could be used much more effectively. Data as an engine
of decision making and the individual dignity of those served by public programs
can and no doubt often do clash, but they can just as well interact.

   Data, of course, cannot solve fundamental policy disputes that implicate not
just comparative outcomes but also relative and at times  [*300]  incommensurate
priorities, as well as differing political economies.  n82 Thus, no amount of
impact assessment will necessarily conclusively resolve the perennial debate in
housing policy about mobility versus community investment.  n83 This debate will
always reflect marginal trade-offs in an environment of scarcity and also
interaction effects with other policy interventions and market forces. But
beginning to understand the trajectory of the investments we make in the name of
affordable housing can sharpen the focus of those investments. That might not be
sufficiently ambitious, but would still be an improvement.

CONCLUSION

   This Article has sought to illuminate the potential benefits--and significant
challenges--of deploying new data aggregation and analytic tools to advance
affordable housing policy. Whether informing siting decisions, understanding the
regional housing market consequences of local zoning policy, transforming
management and resident services, or other areas of affordable housing, and
recognizing the practical barriers to implementation, there is undeniable
promise at a minimum to make better decisions.

   In this arena, we are beginning to see a cycle in which law facilitates the
generation of data that can be grouped across disparate areas to provide a
clearer picture of the consequences of public investments and other policy
choices. That data can also be used to drive other legal mandates, particularly
around enforcement.

   As noted, we must proceed cautiously in embracing these new tools--they will
remain inherently limited in their ability to accurately capture ground-level
reality and they must be used with a keen appreciation for the people whose
lives are being measured and whose voice is too often ignored. But the
alternative of continuing to muddle through is even less palatable.

Legal Topics:

For related research and practice materials, see the following legal topics:
Civil Rights LawContractual Relations & HousingFair Housing RightsGeneral
OverviewPublic Health & Welfare LawHousing & Public BuildingsFair HousingReal
Property LawZoning & Land UseBuilding & Housing Codes

FOOTNOTES:





n1  See CONG. BUDGET OFF,, FEDERAL HOUSING ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS
(2015), https://www.cbo.gov/publication/50782 [https://perma.cc/MBG9-NRC8];
Rachel Berquist et al., State-Funded Housing Assistance Programs (2014),
http://www.tacinc.org/media/43566/State%20Funded%20Housing%20Assistance%20Report
.pdf [https://perma.cc/3MNQ-PFX7].





n2  In zoning for example, whether and where to allow multifamily housing can
directly shape the availability of affordable housing in a community; whether to
invest in transit can make the difference for the viability of affordable
housing in many metropolitan areas; and in housing finance, everything from
Federal Housing Administration insurance to the oversight of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac shape the housing market.





n3  As explored in Section I.B, infra, outputs can be a heuristically efficient
proxy for certain basic outcomes. Thus, units provided give some rough sense of
the impact of an investment, even if nothing is known about the conditions under
which those units are provided, the location of those units, the resources
available to people living in those units, or anything else. But those proxies
have obvious limitations.





n4  See infra Section I.B.





n5  See generally Kristina McElheran & Erik Brynjolfsson, The Rise of
Data-Driven Decision Making is Real but Uneven, HARV. BUS. REV. (Feb. 3, 2016),
https://hbr.org/2016/02/the-rise-of-data-driven-decision-making-is-real-but-unev
en [https://perma.cc/W86QUAF8] (exploring the range of sectors embracing
data-driven decision making). The shift toward data is perhaps best known in
popular culture through Michael Lewis' book Moneyball, which recounts how the
Oakland A's found hidden value in players otherwise underrated by traditional
scouting methods. See MICHAEL LEWIS, MONEYBALL: THE ART OF WINNING AN UNFAIR
GAME (2003).





n6  McElheran & Brynjolfsson, supra note 5.





n7  See James Manyika et al., Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation,
Competition, and Productivity, MCKINSEY GLOBAL INST. 1 (2011),
http://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/big-data
-the-next-frontier-for-innovation [https://perma.cc/3NTA-4UMH].





n8  Much of the legal literature on big data tends to focus on legal constraints
on the misuse of emerging analytic tools, with a particular emphasis on privacy
and threats to civil liberties. See Jonas Lerman, Big Data and Its Exclusions,
66 STAN. L. REV. ONLINE 55, 56 (2013).





n9  See infra Section II.A.





n10  A similar argument can be made in any number of other policy domains and
some--such as health care--are much further along in terms of the centrality of
data to decision making.





n11  It is not just rote to include a reminder that nothing in this Article
reflects the official views of HUD, nor relies on non-public information.





n12  See infra text accompanying notes 35-41.





n13  See Trip Gabriel, Trump Chooses Carson to Lead HUD, N.Y. TIMES (Dec. 6,
2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/us/politics/ben-carson-housing-urban-developm
enttrump.html [https://perma.cc/676D-SJRG].





n14  See Ben S. Carson, Experimenting with Failed Socialism Again, WASH. TIMES
(July 23, 2015),
http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/jul/23/ben-carson-obamas-housing-rules-
try-to-accomplish-/ [https://perma.cc/9AYV-GN5Y].





n15  See Matt Flegenheimer & Yamiche Alcindorjan, Ben Carson Urges Ending
Reliance on Welfare in Bid to Be Housing Chief, N.Y. TIMES (Jan. 12, 2017),
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/us/politics/ben-carsons-hud-housing-nominee-h
earing.html [https://perma.cc/2NMZ-UEDM].





n16  See, e.g., Kristin A. Collins, Administering Marriage: Marriage-Based
Entitlements, Bureaucracy, and the Legal Construction of the Family, 62 VAND. L.
REV. 1085 (2009) (discussing the complex federal bureaucracy that developed to
administer military pensions in the early nineteenth century); see also Uri
Friedman, Anthropology of an Idea: Big Data, FOREIGN POL'Y (Nov. 2012), at 30
(noting that the advent of data analysis in policy can be traced to the use of
punch-card technology to analyze the 1890 Census in a single year, rather than
the eight years the task had previously taken).





n17  See Meg Leta Ambrose, Lessons from the Avalanche of Numbers: Big Data in
Historical Perspective, 11 I/S: J. L. & POL'Y FOR INFO. SOC'Y 201 (2015).





n18  See, e.g., Gordon L. Berlin & Rekha Balu, Evidence at the Crossroads Pt. 3:
Research-Practice Partnerships, the Future of the Evidence Movement, WILLIAM T.
GRANT FOUND. (Nov. 10, 2015),
http://wtgrantfoundation.org/evidence-at-the-crossroads-pt-3-research-practice-p
artnerships-the-future-of-the-evidence-movement [https://perma.cc/EE33-C8PU].





n19  See generally Viktor Mayer-Sch[#xF6]nberger & Kenneth Cukier, Big Data: A
Revolution that Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think (2013); see also
Jonathan Shaw, Why "Big Data" is a Big Deal, HARV. MAG. (Mar. - Apr. 2014), at
30.





n20  These are shorthand descriptions of complex phenomena, to be sure. The
computer-science literature on big data spells out these attributes in more
detail. See, e.g., Doug Laney, 3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume,
Velocity, and Variety, APPLICATION DELIVERY STRATEGIES, META GROUP INC. (Feb.
2001),
http://blogs.gartner.com/doug-laney/files/2012/01/ad949-3D-Data-Management-Contr
olling-Data-Volume-Velocity-and-Variety.pdf, (coining the "3Vs," which have
become the mainstream definition of big data). However, the point here is to
offer some general observations about what is most relevant for affordable
housing law and policy.





n21  Mayer-Sch[#xF6]nberger & Cukier, supra note 19, at 8-9 ("The amount of
stored information grows four times faster than the world economy, while the
processing power of computers grows nine times faster.").





n22  Id. at 8.





n23  See, e.g., Matthew Wall, Big Data: Are You Ready for Blast-off?, BBC NEWS
(Mar. 4, 2014), http://www.bbc.com/news/business-26383058
[https://perma.cc/9WQK-7Q2F] (explaining that in 2012, 2.5 billion gigabytes of
data were produced on a daily basis).





n24  See Neil M. Richards & Jonathan H. King, Three Paradoxes of Big Data, 66
STAN. L. REV. ONLINE 41, 42 (2013) (citing projections from Cisco that by 2020,
thirty-seven billion intelligent devices, all collecting data, will be on line).
In the housing context, this can be seen in the rise of "smart home" technology
as well as building information systems, and other technologies to track the
physical plant, energy usage, and similar information. See, e.g., Jessica Cocco,
Smart Home Technology for the Elderly and the Need for Regulation, 6 PITT. J.
ENVTL. & PUB. HEALTH L. 85, 91 (2011) (explaining that smart home technology,
which collects physiological, locational, and movement data, can be used to
effectively assist the elderly in health care and early intervention).





n25  See infra Part III.





n26  Mayer-Sch[#xF6]nberger & Cukier, supra note 19, at 1-2; for a technical
explanation, see generally Jeremy Ginsburg et al., Detecting influenza epidemics
using search engine query data, 457 NATURE 1012 (2009).





n27  See Gary Marcus, The Web Gets Smarter, NEW YORKER (May 23, 2012),
http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/the-web-gets-smarter
[https://perma.cc/K5DK-3AE4].





n28  See, e.g., Alistair R. Erskine et al., How Geisinger Health System Uses Big
Data to Save Lives, HARV. BUS. REV. (Dec. 15, 2016) ("We use [big data]
capabilities to track and analyze patient outcomes, to correlate their genomic
sequences with clinical care, and to visualize healthcare data across cohorts of
patients and networks of providers . . . with thousands of CPUs processing and
delivering hundreds of terabytes of data every hour."); Jeff Bertolucci, Intel
Cuts Manufacturing Costs With Big Data, INFO. WEEK (Mar. 3, 2013) ("Processor
giant uses big data to develop chips faster, identify manufacturing glitches and
warn about security threats."); see generally Kasturi E. et al., Airline Route
Profitability Analysis and Optimization Using Big Data Analytics on Aviation
Data Sets under Heuristic Techniques, 87 PROCEDIA COMPUTER SCI. 86 (2016)
(explaining that airlines use big data to calculate and predict everything from
the route distance to seats, freight, or mails availability, and fuel to
optimize profitability).





n29  See Abraham R. Wagner & Paul Finkelman, Security, Privacy, and Technology
Development: The Impact on National Security, 2 TEX. A&M L. REV. 597, 598
(2015); Adam R. Pearlman & Erick S. Lee, National Security, Narcissism,
Voyeurism, and Kyllo: How Intelligence Programs and Social Norms Are Affecting
the Fourth Amendment, 2 TEX. A&ML. REV. 719, 777 (2015).





n30  See Helen Margetts, The Promises and Threats of Big Data for Public
Policy-Making, OXFORD INTERNET INST.: POL'Y & INTERNET BLOG (Oct. 28, 2013),
http://blogs.oii.ox.ac.uk/policy/promises-threats-big-data-for-public-policy-mak
ing/ [https://perma.cc/3MDT-KVJL] (discussing the example of California's use of
predictive policing).





n31  Los Angeles, for example, now not only tracks traffic in real time, but
also calibrates every single traffic light in the downtown area. See Farnam
Jahanian, The Policy Infrastructure for Big Data: From Data to Knowledge to
Action, 10 I/S: J. L. & POL'Y FOR INFO. SOC'Y 865, 870 (2015).





n32  See supra note 26.





n33  See Helen Koh, How Big Data Has Changed Public Policy, DATAFLOQ,
https://datafloq.com/read/how-big-data-has-changed-public-policy-infographic/188
0 [https://perma.cc/FH3H-DKD4] (noting that in 2014, the state of Indiana
reported used algorithms to target tax audits based on anomalies in public
records and tax-return information, identifying 75,000 fraudulent returns and
saving approximately eighty-five million dollars).





n34  The Obama Administration focused on big data across the public and private
sectors. For example, the White House issued a report involving case studies in
employment, education, criminal justice, and credit, to highlight how big data
can be used to expand opportunities while potentially inadvertently introducing
bias that could detrimentally affect marginalized groups and individuals. See
EXECUTIVE OFF. OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG RISKS BIG OPPORTUNITIES: THE INTERSECTION
OF BIG DATA AND CIVIL RIGHTS (May 4, 2016),
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2016/05/04/big-risks-big-opportunities
-intersection-big-data-and-civil-rights [https://perma.cc/9V89-C7TA].





n35  See generally U.S. DEP'T OF HOUSING & URB. DEV., DATA SETS
https://data.hud.gov/data_sets.html [https://perma.cc/8LTB-KFPD].





n36  See U.S. DEP'T OF HOUSING & URB. DEV., STRATEGIC PLAN 2014-18 (2014), at
32.





n37  Id.





n38  Id.





n39  Id.





n40  See id. at 25.





n41  Id. at 26-27 (setting as a goal that the agency would "[i]mprove
performance management by enhancing HUD's collection and analysis of data
pertaining to health-related outcomes across HUD-assisted housing programs. Also
improve HUD's ability to integrate and/or conduct administrative data matches
with other partner federal programs.").





n42  See Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, & Lawrence Katz, The Effects of Exposure
to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
Experiment, 106 AM. ECON. REV., 855, 857 (2016).





n43  See, e.g., Lawrence F. Katz, Jeffrey B. Liebman & Jeffrey R. Kling, Moving
to Opportunity in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment, 116
Q. J. OF ECON. 607 (2001); Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey B. Liebman, & Lawrence F.
Katz, Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects, (Nat'l Bureau of Econ.
Res., Working Paper No. 11577, 2005); Susan Clampet-Lundquist & Douglas S.
Massey, Neighborhood Effects on Economic Self-Sufficiency: A Reconsideration of
the Moving to Opportunity Experiment, 114 AM. J. SOC. 107 (2008); Jens Ludwig et
al., Long-Term Neighborhood Effects on Low-Income Families: Evidence from Moving
to Opportunity, 103 AM. ECON. REV. PAPERS AND PROC. 226 (2013).





n44  Other analyses of the MTO program have not shown the positive results that
the Chetty, Hendren, and Katz study has. See, e.g., Kling, Liebman & Katz, supra
note 43 (finding no positive treatment effect for children in terms of
educational or physical health outcomes, with the exception of mental health
benefits and less risky behavior for girls). This is not surprising and it is
important to note that seeking to understand the long-term consequences of
policy interventions is hardly a definitive exercise. Over time, however, it is
possible to discern correlations between inputs and outcomes, and the mixed MTO
results underscore the need for more data.





n45  It is fair to ask whether affordable housing policy should focus on
anything more than the simplest bricks-and-mortar outputs, to include a broader
range of outcomes--in employment, education, integration, and the like. After
all, it is challenging enough to manage the core tasks of building, maintaining,
preserving, and making accessible decent, affordable housing given the paucity
of resources devoted to subsidies compared to the need. See e.g., John J.
Infranca, Housing Resource Bundles: Distributive Justice and Federal Low-Income
Housing Policy, 49 U. RICH. L. REV. 1071 (2015). But the reality is that housing
inevitably and necessarily implicates health and education and employment and
integration and equality and subjective well-being, as well as civic engagement
and the health of the urban fabric. See, e.g., LeighAnn M. Smith, Affirmatively
Further Fair Housing--and Potentially Further Fair Schooling, 24 J. AFFORD.
HOUS. & CMTY. DEV. L. 329, 330 (2015) ("The inherent connection between housing
policy and education policy can be understood by an uncontroversial proposition:
the makeup of our elementary and secondary schools is primarily drawn from the
neighborhoods that surround the school building itself."); see also Michael
Diamond & J. Peter Byrne, Affordable Housing, Land Tenure, and Urban Policy: The
Matrix Revealed, 34 FORDHAM URB. L.J. 527, 532-80 (2007) (tracing the broader
goals of housing policy); Tim Iglesias, Our Pluralist Housing Ethics and the
Struggle for Affordability, 42 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 511 (2007) (describing
housing in terms of an economic good and home, as well as the locus of rights
and social ordering). Ignoring that reality, however complex it renders policy
making, risks unintended negative consequences--as when, for example, housing
investments concentrate poverty on the basis of race.





n46  42 U.S.C. § 3608(e)(5) (requiring that HUD programs and activities be
administered in a manner to affirmatively further the policies of the Fair
Housing Act). In addition to the Fair Housing Act's AFFH mandate, the Housing
and Community Development Act requires local governments receiving state
pass-through grants to certify that they will affirmatively further fair
housing, 42 U.S.C. § 5306(d)(7)(B); the Cranston Gonzalez National Affordable
Housing Act similarly requires, as part of a required comprehensive housing
affordability strategy, that program participants certify that they will
affirmatively further fair housing, 42 U.S.C. § 12705(b)(15); and for public
housing authorities, the Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998
("QHWRA"), created a formal PHA planning process that similarly required
certification that the PHA will affirmatively further fair housing.
Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing, 80 FED. REG. 42271, 42274 n.3 (July 16,
2015) (codified at 24 C.F.R. pts. 5, 91, 92, 570, 574, 576, 903) [hereinafter
AFFH Final Rule].





n47  AFFH Final Rule, supra note 46.





n48  This HUD-supplied data comes from a range of sources, including general
national sources such as the Decennial Census and the American Community Survey,
but also more targeted information from HUD, the Census Bureau, the Department
of Education, and the Environmental Protection Agency. See U.S. DEP'T OF HOUSING
& URB. DEV., AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHERING FAIR HOUSING (AFFH) DATA DOCUMENTATION
(July 2016),
https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/AFFH-Data-Documentation.pdf
[https://perma.cc/APF7-7KHU].





n49  AFFH Final Rule, supra note 46, at 42355 (to be codified at 24 C.F.R. §
5.154(d)(2)).





n50  See Mindy Kao & Dan Immergluck, AFFH Metrics for Affordable Housing
Programs: An Approach to Assessing the Spatial Distribution of Housing Subsidies
in Large Jurisdictions in the Assessment of Fair Housing (May 25, 2016),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2784583
[https://perma.cc/FS9AGCEF].





n51  Scholars have called for similar kinds of analyses, such as human impact
statements, see, e.g., Marc L. Roark, Human Impact Statements, 54 WASHBURN L.J.
649, 653 (2015) (arguing that "cities and states should mandate that public
projects and significant private projects that take advantage of city resources
evaluate and report on the impact to low income populations, including the
homeless populations, prior to approval of the project") and community race
audits, see R.A. Lenhardt, Race Audits, 62 HASTINGS L.J. 1527, 1534 (2011)
(exploring the possibilities for a "voluntary tool called the "race audit" that
can be utilized by localities interested in grappling with the inequalities that
attend the color line"). For all its limitations, the Analysis of Fair Housing
created under HUD's AFFH rule can begin to serve some of these functions on a
nation-wide basis. It is thus both a planning tool, but also a source of
iterative information for policymakers that can be aggregated and mined for
patterns.





n52  See generally David Imbroscio, Beyond Mobility: The Limits of Liberal Urban
Policy, 34 J. OF URB. AFF. 1 (2011); Gregory D. Squires, Beyond the Mobility
versus Place Debate, 34 J. OF URB. AFF. 29, (2012).





n53  See MATTHEW DESMOND, EVICTED: POVERTY AND PROFIT IN AN AMERICAN CITY 308-13
(2016) (proposing a broader, but more targeted housing voucher regime); see also
David A. Dana, An Invisible Crisis in Plain Sight: The Emergence of the
"Eviction Economy," Its Causes, and The Possibilities for Reform in Legal
Regulation and Education, 115 MICH. L. REV. 935 (2017) (reviewing Evicted and
noting the political challenges of expanding voucher support).





n54  See Establishing a More Effective Fair Market Rent System; Using Small Area
Fair Market Rents in the Housing Choice Voucher Program Instead of the Current
50th Percentile FMRs, 81 FED. REG. 80567 (Nov. 16, 2016) (to be codified in
scattered parts of 24 C.F.R. pts. 888, 982, 983, 985).





n55  Cf. Norman Miller & Michael Sklarz, Why Housing Price Indices Are Super
Tools and How to Produce Them, 45 REAL EST. REV. J. 2 (2016) (supporting big
data valuation models using localized neighborhood price indices and data
including terms of the sale, mortgage information, and property-specific
details).





n56  Some efforts have been made in this regard, showing the promise of
aggregation and analysis to drive oversight. In South Bend, Indiana, for
example, Mayor Peter Buttigieg in 2013 launched a Vacant and Abandoned Property
Initiative with Code for America to bring code enforcement inspection data
(which had been made on paper and had to be brought on line) with neighborhood
input to craft a remediation strategy. See CODE FOR AMERICA,
https://www.codeforamerica.org/government-partners/south-bend-in
[https://perma.cc/WR4R-L9Q3]. Another example comes from how New York City
revamped its approach to fire inspections under Mayor Bloomberg. A team of
analysts aggregated disparate data from the building, housing preservation, tax,
police, and fire departments to target illegal apartment conversions that posed
particularly strong fire hazards. Prior to building this database, only thirteen
percent of inspections were deemed serious enough to warrant orders to vacate,
wasting huge resources; after the analysis, that rate went up to seventy
percent. Mayer-Sch[#xF6]nberger & Cukier, supra note 19, at 186-88.





n57  See, e.g., Herbert Needleman, Lead Poisoning, 55 ANN. REV. MED. 209 (2004)
(reviewing pediatric exposure effects not only from high-dose lead toxicity, but
also from lower-dose exposure).





n58  See, e.g., MASS. HEALTH & HUM. SERVS., LEAD SAFE HOMES,
https://eohhs.ehs.state.ma.us/leadsafehomes/default.aspx
[https://perma.cc/3TAL-RN6X] (explaining the Massachusetts Childhood Lead
Poisoning Prevention Program's database for lead-inspected homes).





n59  Some of this data is readily accessible, but much of it is not and it is
rarely aggregated at any scale. Again, the cost of rendering data capable of
interacting across disparate sources is not insignificant.





n60  Cf. James Krieger & Donna L. Higgins, Housing and Health: Time Again for
Public Health Action, 92 AM. J. PUB. HEALTH 758, 758-760 (2002) (reviewing the
data relating housing quality to infectious disease vectors, chronic diseases,
injuries, childhood development, and mental health).





n61  See Retrospective Review--Improving the Previous Participation Reviews of
Prospective Multifamily Housing and Healthcare Programs Participants, 81 FED.
REG. 71244 (Oct. 14, 2016) (to be codified at 24 C.F.R. pt. 200).





n62  See id.





n63  See JOINT CTR. FOR HOUS. STUD. OF HARV. U., America's Rental
Housing--Meeting Challenges, Building on Opportunities 22 fig.18 (2011).





n64  See, e.g. FAMILY HOUSING FUND, The Space Between, Realities and
Possibilities in Preserving Unsubsidized Affordable Rental Housing (June 2013),
http://www.fhfund.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Space_Between_Final_June-2013.p
df [https://perma.cc/7EBK-UUJ8] (discussing possible government involvement in
the unsubsidized affordable housing market).





n65  Id. at 18.





n66  See, e.g., Mireya Navarro, 227,000 Names on List Vie for Rare Vacancies in
City's Public Housing, N.Y. TIMES, July 23, 2013, at A2,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/24/nyregion/for-many-seeking-public-housing-the-w
ait-can-be-endless.html [https://perma.cc/H7MR-B93T] ("There are now 227,000
individuals and families on the waiting list for Housing Authority apartments,
totaling roughly half a million people, and the queue moves slowly. The
apartments are so coveted that few leave them. Only 5,400 to 5,800 open up
annually."); see also Michael Twomey, Legislation Proposed for Online List of
All Affordable Apartments, CITYLAND (Dec. 9, 2015),
http://www.citylandnyc.org/legislation-proposed-for-online-list-of-all-affordabl
e-apartmens/ [https://perma.cc/39Q2-3R8K] (noting proposal to aggregate data on
affordable housing supply).





n67  See, e.g., Vacancy Clearinghouse, TEX. DEP'T OF HOUSING & CMTY. AFF.,
http://hrcic.tdhca.state.tx.us/hrc/VacancyClearinghouseSearch.m
[https://perma.cc/WX9L-YMBN]; see also FLA. HOUSING DATA CLEARINGHOUSE,
http://flhousingdata.shimberg.ufl.edu/ [https://perma.cc/8ZPD-3P8T].





n68  Housing first programs take a harm-reduction approach to chronic
homelessness, placing individuals facing substance abuse, mental illness, or
dual diagnoses into housing and then using the fact that those individuals are
in a safe, known place to craft services around that housing. See Nestor M.
Davidson, "Housing First" for the Chronically Homeless: Challenges of a New
Service Model, 15 J. AFFORDABLE HOUSING & CMTY. DEV. L. 125 (2006).





n69  See Jacob Harold, Nonprofits: Master "Medium Data" Before Tackling Big Data
, HARV. BUS. REV. (March 20, 2013),
https://hbr.org/2013/03/nonprofits-master-medium-data-1
[https://perma.cc/2APX-AJ8S] (distinguishing "medium data" from "big data," and
discussing possible uses for nonprofit organizations).





n70  As a practical matter, some of the data that might be most relevant to a
shift from outputs to outcomes is very difficult to collect and we won't know
necessarily what we need until after the fact. Often data sources are difficult
to link, making correlations (let alone conclusions about causation for any
given investment or intervention) challenging. Moreover, some data is easy to
collect and hard to analyze and some data is hard to collect, and any effort to
use law to generate new information must be sensitive to those dynamics.





n71  See Katherine O'Regan, Data Democratization and Evidence-Based Policy,
EDGE, https://www.huduser.gov/portal/pdredge/pdr-edge-frm-asst-sec-010917.html
[https://perma.cc/7SJM-SKM6] (last visited Mar. 28, 2017).





n72  Id.





n73  There are many excellent intermediaries, such as the Urban Institute, that
work to translate data into policy insights in the affordable housing arena.
Highlighting the potential for federal investments in data is not to exclude the
value of private and philanthropic efforts in this area as well. There is much
symbiotic potential in public-private approaches to the data-policy nexus here.





n74  12 U.S.C. § 2801-2810.





n75  See generally Charles M. Lamb et al., HMDA, Housing Segregation, and Racial
Disparities in Mortgage Lending, 12 STAN. J. C.R. & C.L. 249 (2016) (recounting
the structure and function of HMDA in revealing patterns of segregation and
discrimination).





n76  Cf. Rigel C. Oliveri, Disparate Impact and Integration: With TDCHA v.
Inclusive Communities the Supreme Court Retains an Uneasy Status Quo, 24 J.
AFFORD. HOUS. & CMTY. DEV. L. 267 (2015).





n77  See Solon Barocas & Andrew D. Selbst, Big Data's Disparate Impact, 104 CAL.
L. REV. 671, 684 (2016) ("In other words, the quality and representativeness of
records might vary in ways that correlate with class membership (e.g.,
institutions might maintain systematically less accurate, precise, timely, and
complete records for certain classes of people). Even a dataset with individual
records of consistently high quality can suffer from statistical biases that
fail to represent different groups in accurate proportions."); see also Michael
Mattioli, Disclosing Big Data, 99 MINN. L. REV. 535, 546 (2014) ("Data is often
deeply infused with the subjective judgments of those who collect and organize
it.").





n78  Moreover, data can improve the probabilities that a given intervention will
tend toward a certain outcome, but the actual outcome will always be contingent.
It is hard to imagine being able to overcome that contingency, however, no
matter how much information informs decision making.





n79  See Richards & King, supra note 24, at 43-44 (noting that big data
threatens a corollary to the right of privacy, which is the right of
identity--the right "to say 'who I am'").





n80  See Tim Stenovic, Google Has Gotten Incredibly Good at Predicting
Traffic--Here's How, BUS. INSIDER (Dec. 18, 2015),
http://www.businessinsider.com/how-google-maps-knows-about-traffic-2015-11
[https://perma.cc/7U33-FQE7] ("Here's how it works: All iPhones that have Google
Maps open and Android phones that have location services turned on send
anonymous bits of data back to Google. This allows the company to analyze the
total number of cars, and how fast they're going, on a road at any given
time.").





n81  It is striking, for example, that HUD, the national department dedicated to
housing, contains no office or representative focused specifically on the
residents of HUD-subsidized housing.





n82  Michael Diamond, Affordable Housing and the Conflict of Competing Goods: A
Policy Dilemma, in AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS 1 (Nestor
M. Davidson & Robin Paul Malloy eds., Ashgate Press 2009).





n83  See Nestor M. Davidson, Reconciling People and Place in Housing and
Community Development, 16 GEO. J. ON POVERTY L. & POL'Y 1 (2009).


                               27 of 27 DOCUMENTS


                                  Daily Times

                           October 28, 2017 Saturday

A Sikh champion of Muslims

BYLINE: Akbar Ahmed

SECTION: Vol. 15 No. 296

LENGTH: 1010  words


To the well-known American maxim 'driving while black,' a more recent one has
been added after 9/11, 'flying while Muslim,' as Muslim passengers on planes are
now frequently targeted for speaking Arabic, wearing the hijab or merely looking
'Middle Eastern.'

Professor Anila Daulatzai, a Pakistani-American, became a victim when on
September 26, she boarded a flight in Baltimore, expecting to land in Los
Angeles a few hours later to take care of her elderly father. After informing
flight attendants of her non-life-threatening allergy to dogs, she seated
herself in the back of the aircraft away from two dogs on the plane and prepared
to grade her students' papers. She was suddenly requested by the flight crew to
provide medical documentation of her allergy, which she had already mentioned
was not serious, and upon not being able to produce it, was told to exit the
aircraft. When she refused, the police came and violently dragged her off the
plane, as seen in a video of the incident that went viral. Following the
incident, multiple charges were issued against her, including disorderly conduct
and failure to obey a reasonable and lawful order.

Daulatzai's lawyer, Arjun Sethi, classified the arrest as the confluence of
sexism, racial profiling, and discrimination.

Formerly national legislative counsel for human rights and national security
related affairs for the American Civil Liberties Union and presently Co-Chair of
the American Bar Association's National Committee on Homeland Security,
Counterterrorism, and Treatment of Enemy Combatants, Arjun has spent most of his
career focused on countering racial and religious profiling, advancing
counterterrorism reform, and combating hate-motivated violence.

I first met Arjun, who has a Sikh background, a few years back following a talk
I gave at the National Press Club launching my book, The Thistle and the Drone.
After the programme, he came up to me and began discussing his civil and human
rights work on behalf of not only Muslim Americans, but minorities throughout
the US. I was impressed: He was fighting for justice within the system.

When I invited Arjun to speak before my World of Islam class at American
University recently he made some core points related to the rise in hate-related
incidents against Muslims since 9/11, noting they are trending at least five
times higher than prior to the attacks. He said we are living in an 'open
season' of prejudice against Muslims. Perpetual war in Iraq and Afghanistan has
contributed to prevailing negative attitudes, he argued, and the Guantanamo Bay
detention facility in Cuba stands as a testament to negative treatment of
Muslims suspected of terrorist activities.

Arjun also spoke of police tactics that often serve to perpetuate
discrimination. He d how a team of Associated Press reporters revealed that
covert domestic surveillance programs established in New York City following
9/11, for example, were explicitly designed to monitor Muslim citizens,
representing an abandonment of rights to privacy that all Americans are entitled
to enjoy. None of the surveillance was based on reasonable suspicion or probable
cause, but instead solely based on identity. The surveillance did not result in
a single conviction.

Arjun pointed to media representations that encourage Islamophobia. He cited a
Media Matters study conducted on three days of media reporting after the recent
'Muslim ban.' Their findings revealed that of 176 guests on Fox News, CNN, and
MSNBC, the three major broadcast news networks, only 14 guests were actual
Muslims

These surveillance programs, he noted, have been complemented by watch lists.
There are three types of watch lists administered by the Transportation Security
Administration: a Terrorist Watch List of 2 million individuals suspected of
terrorist activities; a Selectee List, which requires listed individuals to
undergo enhanced screening measures before flying; and a No-Fly List of some
100,000, which forbids listed individuals from boarding an airplane. The
consequences of these watch lists are serious. Those listed may be unable to see
their families or even apply for loans and employment. Listed individuals are
generally considered too dangerous to fly, but not dangerous enough to be
arrested, which keeps them in an uneasy limbo with broad consequences.

Arjun also discussed the efficacy of Countering Violent Extremism (CVE)
programs, which are designed to target individuals who may become terrorists.
These programs are a form of predictive policing, he explained, as they use an
individual's prior history to determine 'threat scores' and geographic analysis
of criminal activity to assess potential 'hot spots.' Arjun believes these
programs are based on abstract methods and junk science that ultimately serve as
another mechanism for surveillance of Muslim citizens.

Arjun argued that the US government needs to begin addressing the structural
racism, discrimination, and criminalisation that foster hate and violence
against Muslims, who remain disproportionately targeted by American national
security policy.

Arjun also pointed to media representations that encourage Islamophobia. He
cited a Media Matters study conducted on three days of media reporting after the
recent 'Muslim ban.' Their findings revealed that of 176 guests on Fox News,
CNN, and MSNBC, the three major broadcast news networks, only 14 guests were
actual Muslims.

Viewing the compassion he brings to his work, I could not but think of the
wisdom of the founder of his faith, Guru Nanak, who famously said, 'Those that
have loved are those that have found God.' While Pakistan has somewhat of a
reputation as encouraging religious intolerance, in fact, the birthplace of Guru
Nanak, which I visited not long ago, is in Nankana Sahib, Pakistan, and I can
report that it is spotlessly clean and tended with special reverence and
affection by the local administration.

Here in America, Arjun Sethi, is championing the great Guru's message of
humanity by fighting for the civil rights of Muslims and of all Americans.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2017

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                           Copyright 2017 Daily Times
                              All Rights Reserved
